cbt.txt
this was a very important point, and needed much discussion.
a thousand names were proposed and rejected for a thousand silly reasons.
one was another reminded the queen of somebody she did not like; but at length an idea flashed into the queen's head, and she called out: "i know!
we will call her muffette."
"that is the very thing," shouted the frog, jumping high into the air; and so it was settled.
the princess muffette was about six months old when the frog noticed that the queen had begun to grow sad again.
"why do you have that look in your eyes?"
she asked one day, when she had come in to play with the baby, who could now crawl.
the way they played their game was to let muffette creep close to the frog, and then for the frog to bound high into the air and alight on the child's head, or back, or legs, when she always sent up a shout of pleasure.
there is no play fellow like a frog; but then it must be a fairy frog, or else you might hurt it, and if you did something dreadful might happen to you.
well, as i have said, our frog was struck with the queen's sad face, and lost no time in asking her what was the reason."
i do n't see what you have to complain of now; muffette is quite well and quite happy, and even the lion fairy is kind to her when she sees her.
what is it?"
"oh!
if her father could only see her!"
broke forth the queen, clasping her hands.
"or if i could only tell him all that has happened since we parted.
but they will have brought him tidings of the broken carriage, and he will have thought me dead, or devoured by wild beasts.
and though he will mourn for me long -- i know that well -- yet in time they will persuade him to take a wife, and she will be young and fair, and he will forget me."
and in all this the queen guessed truly, save that nine long years were to pass before he would consent to put another in her place.
the frog answered nothing at the time, but stopped her game and hopped away among the cypress trees.
here she sat and thought and thought, and the next morning she went back to the queen and said: "i have come, madam, to make you an offer.
shall i go to the king instead of you, and tell him of your sufferings, and that he has the most charming baby in the world for his daughter?
the way is long, and i travel slowly; but, sooner or later, i shall be sure to arrive.
only, are you not afraid to be left without my protection?
ponder the matter carefully; it is for you to decide."
"oh, it needs no pondering," cried the queen joyfully, holding up her clasped hands, and making muffette do likewise, in token of gratitude.
but in order that he may know that you have come from me i will send him a letter."
and pricking her arm, she wrote a few words with her blood on the corner of her handkerchief.
then tearing it off, she gave it to the frog, and they bade each other farewell.
it took the frog a year and four days to mount the ten thousand steps that led to the upper world, but that was because she was still under the spell of a wicked fairy.
by the time she reached the top, she was so tired that she had to remain for another year on the banks of a stream to rest, and also to arrange the procession with which she was to present herself before the king.
for she knew far too well what was due to herself and her relations, to appear at court as if she was a mere nobody.
at length, after many consultations with her cap, the affair was settled, and at the end of the second year after her parting with the queen they all set out.
first walked her bodyguard of grasshoppers, followed by her maids of honour, who were those tiny green frogs you see in the fields, each one mounted on a snail, and seated on a velvet saddle.
next came the water-rats, dressed as pages, and lastly the frog herself, in a litter borne by eight toads, and made of tortoiseshell.
here she could lie at her ease, with her cap on her head, for it was quite large and roomy, and could easily have held two eggs when the frog was not in it.
the journey lasted seven years, and all this time the queen suffered tortures of hope, though muffette did her best to comfort her.
indeed, she would most likely have died had not the lion fairy taken a fancy that the child and her mother should go hunting with her in the upper world, and, in spite of her sorrows, it was always a joy to the queen to see the sun again.
as for little muffette, by the time she was seven her arrows seldom missed their mark.
so, after all, the years of waiting passed more quickly than the queen had dared to hope.
the frog was always careful to maintain her dignity, and nothing would have persuaded her to show her face in public places, or even along the high road, where there was a chance of meeting anyone.
but sometimes, when the procession had to cross a little stream, or go over a piece of marshy ground, orders would be given for a halt; fine clothes were thrown off, bridles were flung aside, and grasshoppers, water-rats, even the frog herself, spent a delightful hour or two playing in the mud.
but at length the end was in sight, and the hardships were forgotten in the vision of the towers of the king's palace; and, one bright morning, the cavalcade entered the gates with all the pomp and circumstance of a royal embassy.
and surely no ambassador had ever created such a sensation!
door and windows, even the roofs of houses, were filled with people, whose cheers reached the ears of the king.
however, he had no time to attend to such matters just then, as, after nine years, he had at last consented to the entreaties of his courtiers, and was on the eve of celebrating his second marriage.
the frog's heart beat high when her litter drew up before the steps of the palace, and leaning forward she beckoned to her side one of the guards who were standing in his doorway."
i wish to see his majesty," said he.
"his majesty is engaged, and can see no one," answered the soldier.
"his majesty will see me," returned the frog, fixing her eye upon him; and somehow the man found himself leading the procession along the gallery into the hall of audience, where the king sat surrounded by his nobles arranging the dresses which everyone was to wear at his marriage ceremony.
all stared in surprise as the procession advanced, and still more when the frog gave one bound from the litter on to the floor, and with another landed on the arm of the chair of state."
i am only just in time, sire," began the frog; "had i been a day later you would have broken your faith which you swore to the queen nine years ago."
"her remembrance will always be dear to me," answered the king gently, though all present expected him to rebuke the frog severely for her impertinence.
but know, lady frog, that a king can seldom do as he wishes, but must be bound by the desires of his subjects.
for nine years i have resisted them; now i can do so no longer, and have made choice of the fair young maiden playing at ball yonder."
"you can not wed her, however fair she may be, for the queen your wife is still alive, and sends you this letter written in her own blood," said the frog, holding out the square of handkerchief as she spoke.
"and, what is more, you have a daughter who is nearly nine years old, and more beautiful than all the other children in the world put together."
the king turned pale when he heard these words, and his hand trembled so that he could hardly read what the queen had written.
then he kissed the handkerchief twice or thrice, and burst into tears, and it was some minutes before he could speak.
when at length he found his voice he told his councillors that the writing was indeed that of the queen, and now that he had the joy of knowing she was alive he could, of course, proceed no further with his second marriage.
this naturally displeased the ambassadors who had conducted the bride to court, and one of them inquired indignantly if he meant to put such an insult on the princess on the word of a mere frog."
i am not a "mere frog," and i will give you proof of it," retorted the angry little creature.
and putting on her cap, she cried: fairies that are my friends, come hither!"
and in a moment a crowd of beautiful creatures, each one with a crown on her head, stood before her.
certainly none could have guessed that they were the snails, water-rats, and grasshoppers from which she had chosen her retinue.
at a sign from the frog the fairies danced a ballet, with which everyone was so delighted that they begged to have to repeated; but now it was not youths and maidens who were dancing, but flowers.
then these again melted into fountains, whose waters interlaced and, rushing down the sides of the hall, poured out in a cascade down the steps, and formed a river found the castle, with the most beautiful little boats upon it, all painted and gilded.
"oh, let us go in them for a sail!"
cried the princess, who had long ago left her game of ball for a sight of these marvels, and, as she was bent upon it, the ambassadors, who had been charged never to lose sight of her, were obliged to go also, though they never entered a boat if they could help it.
but the moment they and the princess had seated themselves on the soft cushions, river and boats vanished, and the princess and the ambassadors vanished too.
instead the snails and grasshoppers and water-rats stood round the frog in their natural shapes.
"perhaps," said she, "your majesty may now be convinced that i am a fairy and speak the truth.
therefore lose no time in setting in order the affairs of your kingdom and go in search of your wife.
here is a ring that will admit you into the presence of the queen, and will likewise allow you to address unharmed the lion fairy, though she is the most terrible creature that ever existed."
by this time the king had forgotten all about the princess, whom he had only chosen to please his people, and was as eager to depart on his journey as the frog was for him to go.
he made one of his ministers regent of the kingdom, and gave the frog everything her heart could desire; and with her ring on his finger he rode away to the outskirts of the forest.
here he dismounted, and bidding his horse go home, he pushed forward on foot.
having nothing to guide him as to where he was likely to find the entrance of the under-world, the king wandered hither and thither for a long while, till, one day, while he was resting under a tree, a voice spoke to him.
"why do you give yourself so much trouble for nought, when you might know what you want to know for the asking?
alone you will never discover the path that leads to your wife."
much startled, the king looked about him.
he could see nothing, and somehow, when he thought about it, the voice seemed as if it were part of himself.
suddenly his eyes fell on the ring, and he understood.
"fool that i was!"
cried he; "and how much precious time have i wasted?
dear ring, i beseech you, grant me a vision of my wife and my daughter!"
and even as he spoke there flashed past him a huge lioness, followed by a lady and a beautiful young maid mounted on fairy horses.
almost fainting with joy he gazed after them, and then sank back trembling on the ground.
"oh, lead me to them, lead me to them!"
he exclaimed.
and the ring, bidding him take courage, conducted him safely to the dismal place where his wife had lived for ten years.
now the lion fairy knew beforehand of his expected presence in her dominions, and she ordered a palace of crystal to be built in the middle of the lake of quicksilver; and in order to make it more difficult of approach she let it float whither it would.
immediately after their return from the chase, where the king had seen them, she conveyed the queen and muffette into the palace, and put them under the guard of the monsters of the lake, who one and all had fallen in love with the princess.
they were horribly jealous, and ready to eat each other up for her sake, so they readily accepted the charge.
some stationed themselves round the floating palace, some sat by the door, while the smallest and lightest perched themselves on the roof.
of course the king was quite ignorant of these arrangements, and boldly entered the palace of the lion fairy, who was waiting for him, with her tail lashing furiously, for she still kept her lion's shape.
with a roar that shook the walls she flung herself upon him; but he was on the watch, and a blow from his sword cut off the paw she had put forth to strike him dead.
she fell back, and with his helmet still on and his shield up, he set his foot on her throat.
"give me back the wife and the child you have stolen from me," he said, "or you shall not live another second!"
but the fairy answered: "look through the window at that lake and see if it is in my power to give them to you."
and the king looked, and through the crystal walls he beheld his wife and daughter floating on the quicksilver.
at that sight the lion fairy and all her wickedness was forgotten.
flinging off his helmet, he shouted to them with all his might.
the queen knew his voice, and she and muffette ran to the window and held out their hands.
then the king swore a solemn oath that he would never leave the spot without taking them if it should cost him his life; and he meant it, though at the moment he did not know what he was undertaking.
three years passed by, and the king was no nearer to obtaining his heart's desire.
he had suffered every hardship that could be imagined -- nettles had been his bed, wild fruits more bitter than gall his food, while his days had been spent in fighting the hideous monsters which kept him from the palace.
he had not advanced one single step, nor gained one solitary advantage.
now he was almost in despair, and ready to defy everything and throw himself into the lake.
it was at this moment of his blackest misery that, one night, a dragon who had long watched him from the roof crept to his side.
"you thought that love would conquer all obstacles," said he; "well, you have found it has n't!
but if you will swear to me by your crown and sceptre that you will give me a dinner of the food that i never grow tired of, whenever i choose to ask for it, i will enable you to reach your wife and daughter."
ah, how glad the king was to hear that!
what oath would he not have taken so as to clasp his wife and child in is arms?
joyfully he swore whatever the dragon asked of him; then he jumped on his back, and in another instant would have been carried by the strong wings into the castle if the nearest monsters had not happened to awake and hear the noise of talking and swum to the shore to give battle.
the fight was long and hard, and when the king at last beat back his foes another struggle awaited him.
at the entrance gigantic bats, owls, and crows set upon him from all sides; but the dragon had teeth and claws, while the queen broke off sharp bits of glass and stabbed and cut in her anxiety to help her husband.
at length the horrible creatures flew away; a sound like thunder was heard, the palace and the monsters vanished, while, at the same moment -- no one knew how -- the king found himself standing with his wife and daughter in the hall of his own home.
the dragon had disappeared with all the rest, and for some years no more was heard or thought of him.
muffette grew every day more beautiful, and when she was fourteen the kings and emperors of the neighbouring countries sent to ask her in marriage for themselves or their sons.
for a long time the girl turned a deaf ear to all their prayers; but at length a young prince of rare gifts touched her heart, and though the king had left her free to choose what husband she would, he had secretly hoped that out of all the wooers this one might be his son-in-law.
so they were betrothed that some day with great pomp, and then with many tears, the prince set out for his father's court, bearing with him a portrait of muffette.
the days passed slowly to muffette, in spite of her brave efforts to occupy herself and not to sadden other people by her complaints.
one morning she was playing on her harp in the queen's chamber when the king burst into the room and clasped his daughter in his arms with an energy that almost frightened her.
"oh, my child!
my dear child!
why were you ever born?"
cried he, as soon as he could speak.
"is the prince dead?"
faltered muffette, growing white and cold.
"no, no; but -- oh, how can i tell you!"
and he sank down on a pile of cushions while his wife and daughter knelt beside him.
at length he was able to tell his tale, and a terrible one it was!
there had just arrived at court a huge giant, as ambassador from the dragon by whose help the king had rescued the queen and muffette from the crystal palace.
the dragon had been very busy for many years past, and had quite forgotten the princess till the news of her betrothal reached his ears.
then he remembered the bargain he had made with her father; and the more he heard of muffette the more he felt sure she would make a delicious dish.
so he had ordered the giant who was his servant to fetch her at once.
no words would paint the horror of both the queen and the princess as they listened to this dreadful doom.
they rushed instantly to the hall, where the giant was awaiting them, and flinging themselves at his feet implored him to take the kingdom if he would, but to have pity on the princess.
the giant looked at them kindly, for he was not at all hard-hearted, but said that he had no power to do anything, and that if the princess did not go with him quietly the dragon would come himself.
several days went by, and the king and queen hardly ceased from entreating the aid of the giant, who by this time was getting weary of waiting.
"there is only one way of helping you," he said at last, "and that is to marry the princess to my nephew, who, besides being young and handsome, has been trained in magic, and will know how to keep her safe from the dragon."
"oh, thank you, thank you!"
cried the parents, clasping his great hands to their breasts.
"you have indeed lifted a load from us.
she shall have half the kingdom for her dowry."
but muffette stood up and thrust them aside."
i will not buy my life with faithlessness," she said proudly; "and i will go with you this moment to the dragon's abode."
and all her father's and mother's tears and prayers availed nothing to move her.
the next morning muffette was put into a litter, and, guarded by the giant and followed by the king and queen and the weeping maids of honour, they started for the foot of the mountain where the dragon had his castle.
the way, though rough and stony, seemed all too short, and when they reached the spot appointed by the dragon the giant ordered the men who bore the litter to stand still.
"it is time for you to bid farewell to your daughter," said he; "for i see the dragon coming to us."
it was true; a cloud appeared to pass over the sun, for between them and it they could all discern dimly a huge body half a mile long approaching nearer and nearer.
at first the king could not believe that this was the small beast who had seemed so friendly on the shore of the lake of quicksilver but then he knew very little of necromancy, and had never studied the art of expanding and contracting his body.
but it was the dragon and nothing else, whose six wings were carrying him forward as fast as might be, considering his great weight and the length of his tail, which had fifty twists and a half.
he came quickly, yes; but the frog, mounted on a greyhound, and wearing her cap on her head, went quicker still.
entering a room where the prince was sitting gazing at the portrait of his betrothed, she cried to him: "what are you doing lingering here, when the life of the princess is nearing its last moment?
in the courtyard you will find a green horse with three heads and twelve feet, and by its side a sword eighteen yards long.
hasten, lest you should be too late!"
the fight lasted all day, and the prince's strength was well-nigh spent, when the dragon, thinking that the victory was won, opened his jaws to give a roar of triumph.
the prince saw his chance, and before his foe could shut his mouth again had plunged his sword far down his adversary's throat.
there was a desperate clutching of the claws to the earth, a slow flagging of the great wings, then the monster rolled over on his side and moved no more.
muffette was delivered.
after this they all went back to the palace.
the marriage took place the following day, and muffette and her husband lived happy for ever after.
the adventures of covan the brown-haired -lsb- from les contes des fees, par madame d'aulnoy. -rsb-
on the shores of the west, where the great hills stand with their feet in the sea, dwelt a goatherd and his wife, together with their three sons and one daughter.
all day long the young men fished and hunted, while their sister took out the kids to pasture on the mountain, or stayed at home helping her mother and mending the nets.
for several years they all lived happily together, when one day, as the girl was out on the hill with the kids, the sun grew dark and an air cold as a thick white mist came creeping, creeping up from the sea.
she rose with a shiver, and tried to call to her kids, but the voice died away in her throat, and strong arms seemed to hold her.
loud were the wails in the hut by the sea when the hours passed on and the maiden came not.
many times the father and brothers jumped up, thinking they heard her steps, but in the thick darkness they could scarcely see their own hands, nor could they tell where the river lay, nor where the mountain.
one by one the kids came home, and at every bleat someone hurried to open the door, but no sound broke the stillness.
through the night no one slept, and when morning broke and the mist rolled back, they sought the maiden by sea and by land, but never a trace of her could be found anywhere.
thus a year and a day slipped by, and at the end of it gorla of the flocks and his wife seemed suddenly to have grown old.
their sons too were sadder than before, for they loved their sister well, and had never ceased to mourn for her.
at length ardan the eldest spoke and said: "it is now a year and a day since our sister was taken from us, and we have waited in grief and patience for her to return.
surely some evil has befallen her, or she would have sent us a token to put our hearts at rest; and i have vowed to myself that my eyes shall not know sleep till, living or dead, i have found her."
"if you have vowed, then must you keep your vow," answered gorla.
"but better had it been if you had first asked your father's leave before you made it.
yet, since it is so, your mother will bake you a cake for you to carry with you on your journey.
who can tell how long it may be?"
so the mother arose and baked not one cake but two, a big one and a little one.
"choose, my son," said she.
"will you have the little cake with your mother's blessing, or the big one without it, in that you have set aside your father and taken on yourself to make a vow?'"
i will have the large cake," answered the youth; "for what good would my mother's blessing do for me if i was dying of hunger?"
and taking the big cake he went his way.
straight on he strode, letting neither hill nor river hinder him.
swiftly he walked -- swiftly as the wind that blew down the mountain.
the eagles and the gulls looked on from their nests as he passed, leaving the deer behind him; but at length he stopped, for hunger had seized on him, and he could walk no more.
trembling with fatigue he sat himself on a rock and broke a piece off his cake.
"spare me a morsel, ardan son of gorla," asked a raven, fluttering down towards him.
"seek food elsewhere, o bearer of ill-news," answered ardan son of gorla; "it is but little i have for myself."
and he stretched himself out for a few moments, then rose to his feet again.
on and on went he till the little birds flew to their nests, and the brightness died out of the sky, and a darkness fell over the earth.
on and on, and on, till at last he saw a beam of light streaming from a house and hastened towards it.
the door was opened and he entered, but paused when he beheld an old man lying on a bench by the fire, while seated opposite him was a maiden combing out the locks of her golden hair with a comb of silver.
"welcome, fair youth," said the old man, turning his head.
"sit down and warm yourself, and tell me how fares the outer world.
it is long since i have seen it."
"all my news is that i am seeking service," answered ardan son of gorla;" i have come from far since sunrise, and glad was i to see the rays of your lamp stream into the darkness.'"
i need someone to herd my three dun cows, which are hornless," said the old man.
"if, for the space of a year, you can bring them back to me each evening before the sun sets, i will make you payment that will satisfy your soul."
but here the girl looked up and answered quickly: "ill will come of it if he listens to your offer."
"counsel unsought is worth nothing," replied, rudely, ardan son of gorla.
"it would be little indeed that i am fit for if i can not drive three cows out to pasture and keep them safe from the wolves that may come down from the mountains.
therefore, good father, i will take service with you at daybreak, and ask no payment till the new year dawns."
next morning the bell of the deer was not heard amongst the fern before the maiden with the hair of gold had milked the cows, and led them in front of the cottage where the old man and ardan son of gorla awaited them.
"let them wander where they will," he said to his servant, "and never seek to turn them from their way, for well they know the fields of good pasture.
but take heed to follow always behind them, and suffer nothing that you see, and nought that you hear, to draw you into leaving them.
now go, and may wisdom go with you."
as he ceased speaking he touched one of the cows on her forehead, and she stepped along the path, with the two others one on each side.
as he had been bidden, behind them came ardan son of gorla, rejoicing in his heart that work so easy had fallen to his lot.
at the year's end, thought he, enough money would lie in his pocket to carry him into far countries where his sister might be, and, in the meanwhile, someone might come past who could give him tidings of her.
thus he spoke to himself, when his eyes fell on a golden cock and a silver hen running swiftly along the grass in front of him.
in a moment the words that the old man had uttered vanished from his mind and he gave chase.
they were so near that he could almost seize their tails, yet each time he felt sure he could catch them his fingers closed on the empty air.
at length he could run no more, and stopped to breathe, while the cock and hen went on as before.
then he remembered the cows, and, somewhat frightened, turned back to seek them.
luckily they had not strayed far, and were quietly feeding on the thick green grass.
ardan son of gorla was sitting under a tree, when he beheld a staff of gold and a staff of silver doubling themselves in strange ways on the meadow in front of him, and starting up he hastened towards them.
he followed them till he was tired, but he could not catch them, though they seemed ever within his reach.
when at last he gave up the quest his knees trembled beneath him for very weariness, and glad was he to see a tree growing close by lade with fruits of different sorts, of which he ate greedily.
the sun was by now low in the heavens, and the cows left off feeding, and turned their faces home again, followed by ardan son of gorla.
at the door of their stable the maiden stood awaiting them, and saying nought to their herd, she sat down and began to milk.
but it was not milk that flowed into her pail; instead it was filled with a thin stream of water, and as she rose up from the last cow the old man appeared outside.
"faithless one, you have betrayed your trust!"
he said to ardan son of gorla.
"not even for one day could you keep true!
well, you shall have your reward at once, that others may take warning from you."
and waving his wand he touched with it the chest of the youth, who became a pillar of stone.
now gorla of the flocks and his wife were full of grief that they had lost a son as well as a daughter, for no tidings had come to them of ardan their eldest born.
at length, when two years and two days had passed since the maiden had led her kids to feed on the mountain and had been seen no more, ruais, second son of gorla, rose up one morning, and said: "time is long without my sister and ardan my brother.
so i have vowed to seek them wherever they may be."
and his father answered: "better it had been if you had first asked my consent and that of your mother; but as you have vowed so must you do."
then he bade his wife make a cake, but instead she made two, and offered ruais his choice, as she had done to ardan.
like ardan, ruais chose the large, unblessed cake, and set forth on his way, doing always, though he knew it not, that which ardan had done; so, needless is it to tell what befell him till he too stood, a pillar of stone, on the hill behind the cottage, so that all men might see the fate that awaited those who broke their faith.
another year and a day passed by, when covan the brown-haired, youngest son of gorla of the flocks, one morning spake to his parents, saying: "it is more than three years since my sister left us.
my brothers have also gone, no one know whither, and of us four none remains but i. no, therefore, i long to seek them, and i pray you and my mother to place no hindrance in my way."
and his father answered: "go, then, and take our blessing with you."
so the wife of gorla of the flocks baked two cakes, one large and one small; and covan took the small one, and started on his quest.
in the wood he felt hungry, for he had walked far, and he sat down to eat.
suddenly a voice behind him cried: "a bit for me!
a bit for me!"
and looking round he beheld the black raven of the wilderness.
"yes, you shall have a bit," said covan the brown-haired; and breaking off a piece he stretched it upwards to the raven, who ate it greedily.
then covan arose and went forward, till he saw the light from the cottage streaming before him, and glad was he, for night was at hand.
"maybe i shall find some work there," he thought, "and at least i shall gain money to help me in my search; for who knows how far my sister and my brothers may have wandered?"
the door stood open and he entered, and the old man gave him welcome, and the golden-haired maiden likewise.
as happened before, he was offered by the old man to herd his cows; and, as she had done to his brothers, the maiden counselled him to leave such work alone.
but, instead of answering rudely, like both ardan and ruais, he thanked her, with courtesy, though he had no mind to heed her; and he listened to the warnings and words of his new master.
next day he set forth at dawn with the dun cows in front of him, and followed patiently wherever they might lead him.
on the way he saw the gold cock and silver hen, which ran even closer to him than they had done to his brothers.
sorely tempted, he longed to give them chase; but, remembering in time that he had been bidden to look neither to the right nor to the left, with a mighty effort he turned his eyes away.
then the gold and silver staffs seemed to spring from the earth before him, but this time also he overcame; and though the fruit from the magic tree almost touched his mouth, he brushed it aside and went steadily on.
that day the cows wandered father than ever they had done before, and never stopped till they had reached a moor where the heather was burning.
the fire was fierce, but the cows took no heed, and walked steadily through it, covan the brown-haired following them.
next they plunged into a foaming river, and covan plunged in after them, though the water came high above his waist.
on the other side of the river lay a wide plain, and here the cows lay down, while covan looked about him.
near him was a house built of yellow stone, and from it came sweet songs, and covan listened, and his heart grew light within him.
while he was thus waiting there ran up to him a youth, scarcely able to speak so swiftly had he sped; and he cried aloud: "hasten, hasten, covan the brown-haired, for your cows are in the corn, and you must drive them out!"
"nay," said covan smiling, "it had been easier for you to have driven them out than to come here to tell me."
and he went on listening to the music.
very soon the same youth returned and cried with panting breath: "out upon you, covan son of gorla, that you stand there agape.
for our dogs are chasing your cows, and you must drive them off!"
"nay, then," answered covan as before, "it had been easier for you to call off your dogs than to come here to tell me."
and he stayed where he was till the music ceased.
then he turned to look for the cows, and found them all lying in the place where he had left them; but when they saw covan they rose up and walked homewards, taking a different path to that they had trod in the morning.
this time they passed over a plain so bare that a pin could not have lain there unnoticed, yet covan beheld with surprise a foal and its mother feeding there, both as fat as if they had pastured on the richest grass.
further on they crossed another plain, where the grass was thick and green, but on it were feeding a foal and its mother, so lean that you could have counted their ribs.
and further again the path led them by the shores of a lake whereon were floating two boats; one full of gay and happy youths, journeying to the land of the sun, and another with grim shapes clothed in black, travelling to the land of night.
"what can these things mean?"
said covan to himself, as he followed his cows.
darkness now fell, the wind howled, and torrents of rain poured upon them.
covan knew not how far they might yet have to go, or indeed if they were on the right road.
he could not even see his cows, and his heart sank lest, after all, he should have failed to bring them safely back.
what was he to do?
he waited thus, for he could go neither forwards nor backwards, till he felt a great friendly paw laid on his shoulder.
"my cave is just here," said the dog of maol-mor, of whom covan son of gorla had heard much.
"spend the night here, and you shall be fed on the flesh of lamb, and shall lay aside three-thirds of thy weariness."
and covan entered, and supped, and slept, and in the morning rose up a new man.
"farewell, covan," said the dog of maol-mor.
"may success go with you, for you took what i had to give and did not mock me.
so, when danger is your companion, wish for me, and i will not fail you."
at these words the dog of maol-mor disappeared into the forest, and covan went to seek his cows, which were standing in the hollow where the darkness had come upon them.
at the sight of covan the brown-haired they walked onwards, covan following ever behind them, and looking neither to the right nor to the left.
all that day they walked, and when night fell they were in a barren plain, with only rocks for shelter.
"we must rest here as best we can," spoke covan to the cows.
and they bowed their heads and lay down in the place where they stood.
then came the black raven of corri-nan-creag, whose eyes never closed, and whose wings never tired; and he fluttered before the face of covan and told him that he knew of a cranny in the rock where there was food in plenty, and soft moss for a bed.
"go with me thither," he said to covan, "and you shall lay aside three-thirds of your weariness, and depart in the morning refreshed," and covan listened thankfully to his words, and at dawn he rose up to seek his cows.
"farewell!"
cried the black raven.
"you trusted me, and took all i had to offer in return for the food you once gave me.
so if in time to come you need a friend, wish for me, and i will not fail you."
as before, the cows were standing in the spot where he had left them, ready to set out.
all that day they walked, on and on, and on, covan son of gorla walking behind them, till night fell while they were on the banks of a river.
"we can go no further," spake covan to the cows.
and they began to eat the grass by the side of the stream, while covan listened to them and longed for some supper also, for they had travelled far, and his limbs were weak under him.
then there was a swish of water at his feet, and out peeped the head of the famous otter doran-donn of the stream.
"trust to me and i will find you warmth and shelter," said doran-donn; "and for food fish in plenty."
and covan went with him thankfully, and ate and rested, and laid aside three-thirds of his weariness.
at sunrise he left his bed of dried sea-weed, which had floated up with the tide, and with a grateful heart bade farewell to doran-donn.
"because you trusted me and took what i had to offer, you have made me your friend, covan," said doran-donn.
"and if you should be in danger, and need help from one who can swim a river or dive beneath a wave, call to me and i will come to you."
then he plunged into the stream, and was seen no more.
the cows were standing ready in the place where covan had left them, and they journeyed on all that day, till, when night fell, they reached the cottage.
joyful indeed was the old man as the cows went into their stables, and he beheld the rich milk that flowed into the pail of the golden-haired maiden with the silver comb.
"you have done well indeed," he said to covan son of gorla.
"and now, what would you have as a reward?'"
i want nothing for myself," answered covan the brown-haired; "but i ask you to give me back my brothers and my sister who have been lost to us for three years past.
you are wise and know the lore of fairies and of witches; tell me where i can find them, and what i must do to bring them to life again."
the old man looked grave at the words of covan.
"yes, truly i know where they are," answered he, "and i say not that they may not be brought to life again.
but the perils are great -- too great for you to overcome."
"tell me what they are," said covan again, "and i shall know better if i may overcome them."
"listen, then, and judge.
in the mountain yonder there dwells a roe, white of foot, with horns that branch like the antlers of a deer.
on the lake that leads to the land of the sun floats a duck whose body is green and whose neck is of gold.
in the pool of corri-bui swims a salmon with a skin that shines like silver, and whose gills are red -- bring them all to me, and then you shall know where dwell your brothers and your sister!"
"to-morrow at cock-crow i will begone!"
answered covan.
the way to the mountain lay straight before him, and when he had climbed high he caught sight of the roe with the white feet and the spotted sides, on the peak in front.
full of hope he set out in pursuit of her, but by the time he had reached that peak she had left it and was to be seen on another.
and so it always happened, and covan's courage had well-nigh failed him, when the thought of the dog of maol-mor darted into his mind.
"oh, that he was here!"
he cried.
and looking up he saw him.
"why did you summon me?"
asked the dog of maol-mor.
and when covan had told him of his trouble, and how the roe always led him further and further, the dog only answered: "fear nothing; i will soon catch her for you."
and in a short while he laid the roe unhurt at covan's feet.
"what will you wish me to do with her?"
said the dog.
and covan answered: "the old man bade me bring her, and the duck with the golden neck, and the salmon with the silver sides, to his cottage; if i shall catch them, i know not.
but carry you the roe to the back of the cottage, and tether her so that she can not escape."
"it shall be done," said the dog of maol-mor.
then covan sped to the lake which led to the land of the sun, where the duck with the green body and the golden neck was swimming among the water-lilies.
"surely i can catch him, good swimmer as i am," to himself.
but, if he could swim well, the duck could swim better, and at length his strength failed him, and he was forced to seek the land.
"oh that the black raven were here to help me!"
he thought to himself.
and in a moment the black raven was perched on his shoulder.
"how can i help you?"
asked the raven.
and covan answered: "catch me the green duck that floats on the water."
and the raven flew with his strong wings and picked him up in his strong beak, and in another moment the bird was laid at the feet of covan.
this time it was easy for the young man to carry his prize, and after giving thanks to the raven for his aid, he went on to the river.
in the deep dark pool of which the old man had spoken the silver-sided salmon was lying under a rock.
"surely i, good fisher as i am, can catch him," said covan son of gorla.
and cutting a slender pole from a bush, he fastened a line to the end of it.
but cast with what skill he might, it availed nothing, for the salmon would not even look at the bait."
i am beaten at last, unless the doran-donn can deliver me," he cried.
and as he spoke there was a swish of the water, and the face of the doran-donn looked up at him."
o catch me, i pray you, that salmon under the rock!"
said covan son of gorla.
and the doran-donn dived, and laying hold of the salmon by his tail, bore it back to the place where covan was standing.
"the roe, and the duck, and the salmon are here," said covan to the old man, when he reached the cottage.
and the old man smiled on him and bade him eat and drink, and after he hungered no more, he would speak with him.
and this was what the old man said: "you began well, my son, so things have gone well with you.
you set store by your mother's blessing, therefore you have been blest.
you gave food to the raven when it hungered, you were true to the promise you had made to me, and did not suffer yourself to be turned aside by vain shows.
you were skilled to perceive that the boy who tempted you to leave the temple was a teller of false tales, and took with a grateful heart what the poor had to offer you.
last of all, difficulties gave you courage, instead of lending you despair.
and now, as to your reward, you shall in truth take your sister home with you, and your brothers i will restore to life; but idle and unfaithful as they are their lot is to wander for ever.
and so farewell, and may wisdom be with you."
"first tell me your name?"
asked covan softly."
i am the spirit of age," said the old man.
the princess bella-flor -lsb- taken from a celtic story.
translated by doctor macleod clarke. -rsb-
once upon a time there lived a man who had two sons.
when they grew up the elder went to seek his fortune in a far country, and for many years no one heard anything about him.
meanwhile the younger son stayed at home with his father, who died at last in a good old age, leaving great riches behind him.
for some time the son who stayed at home spent his father's wealth freely, believing that he alone remained to enjoy it.
but, one day, as he was coming down stairs, he was surprised to see a stranger enter the hall, looking about as if the house belonged to him.
"have you forgotten me?"
asked the man."
i ca n't forget a person i have never known," was the rude answer."
i am your brother," replied the stranger, "and i have returned home without the money i hoped to have made.
and, what is worse, they tell me in the village that my father is dead.
i would have counted my lost gold as nothing if i could have seen him once more."
"he died six months ago," said the rich brother, "and he left you, as your portion, the old wooden chest that stands in the loft.
you had better go there and look for it; i have no more time to waste."
and he went his way.
so the wanderer turned his steps to the loft, which was at the top of the storehouse, and there he found the wooden chest, so old that it looked as if it were dropping to pieces.
"what use is this old thing to me?"
he said to himself.
"oh, well, it will serve to light a fire at which i can warm myself; so things might be worse after all."
placing the chest on his back, the man, whose name was jose, set out for his inn, and, borrowing a hatchet, began to chop up the box.
in doing so he discovered a secret drawer, and in it lay a paper.
he opened the paper, not knowing what it might contain, and was astonished to find that it was the acknowledgment of a large debt that was owing to his father.
putting the precious writing in his pocket, he hastily inquired of the landlord where he could find the man whose name was written inside, and he ran out at once in search of him.
the debtor proved to be an old miser, who lived at the other end of the village.
he had hoped for many months that the paper he had written had been lost or destroyed, and, indeed, when he saw it, was very unwilling to pay what he owed.
however, the stranger threatened to drag him before the king, and when the miser saw that there was no help for it he counted out the coins one by one.
the stranger picked them up and put them in his pocket, and went back to his inn feeling that he was now a rich man.
a few weeks after this he was walking through the streets of the nearest town, when he met a poor woman crying bitterly.
he stopped and asked her what was the matter, and she answered between her sobs that her husband was dying, and, to make matters worse, a creditor whom he could not pay was anxious to have him taken to prison.
"comfort yourself," said the stranger kindly; "they shall neither send your husband to prison nor sell your goods.
i will not only pay his debts but, if he dies, the cost of his burial also.
and now go home, and nurse him as well as you can."
and so she did; but, in spite of her care, the husband died, and was buried by the stranger.
but everything cost more than he expected, and when all was paid he found that only three gold pieces were left.
"what am i to do now?"
said he to himself."
i think i had better go to court, and enter into the service of the king."
at first he was only a servant, who carried the king the water for his bath, and saw that his bed was made in a particular fashion.
but he did his duties so well that his master soon took notice of him, and in a short time he rose to be a gentleman of the bedchamber.
now, when this happened the younger brother had spent all the money he had inherited, and did not know how to make any for himself.
he then bethought him of the king's favourite, and went whining to the palace to beg that his brother, whom he had so ill-used, would give him his protection, and find him a place.
the elder, who was always ready to help everyone spoke to the king on his behalf, and the next day the young man took up is work at court.
unfortunately, the new-comer was by nature spiteful and envious, and could not bear anyone to have better luck than himself.
by dint of spying through keyholes and listening at doors, he learned that the king, old and ugly though he was, had fallen in love with the princess bella-flor, who would have nothing to say to him, and had hidden herself in some mountain castle, no one knew where.
"that will do nicely," thought the scoundrel, rubbing his hands.
"it will be quite easy to get the king to send my brother in search of her, and if he returns without finding her, his head will be the forfeit.
either way, he will be out of my path."
so he went at once to the lord high chamberlain and craved an audience of the king, to whom he declared he wished to tell some news of the highest importance.
the king admitted him into the presence chamber without delay, and bade him state what he had to say, and to be quick about it.
"oh, sire!
the princess bella-flor --" answered the man, and then stopped as if afraid.
"what of the princess bella-flor?"
asked the king impatiently."
i have heard -- it is whispered at court -- that your majesty desires to know where she lies in hiding.'"
i would give half my kingdom to the man who will bring her to me," cried the king, eagerly.
"speak on, knave; has a bird of the air revealed to you the secret?"
"it is not i, but my brother, who knows," replied the traitor; "if your majesty would ask him --" but before the words were out of his mouth the king had struck a blow with his sceptre on a golden plate that hung on the wall.
"order jose to appear before me instantly," he shouted to the servant who ran to obey his orders, so great was the noise his majesty had made; and when jose entered the hall, wondering what in the world could be the matter, the king was nearly dumb from rage and excitement.
"bring me the princess bella-flor this moment," stammered he, "for if you return without her i will have you drowned!"
and without another word he left the hall, leaving jose staring with surprise and horror.
"how can i find the princess bella-flor when i have never even seen her?"
thought he.
"but it is no use staying here, for i shall only be put to death."
and he walked slowly to the stables to choose himself a horse.
there were rows upon rows of fine beasts with their names written in gold above their stalls, and jose was looking uncertainly from one to the other, wondering which he should choose, when an old white horse turned its head and signed to him to approach.
"take me," it said in a gentle whisper, "and all will go well."
jose still felt so bewildered with the mission that the king had given him that he forgot to be astonished at hearing a horse talk.
mechanically he laid his hand on the bridle and led the white horse out of the stable.
he was about to mount on his back, when the animal spoke again: "pick up those three loaves of bread which you see there, and put them in your pocket."
jose did as he was told, and being in a great hurry to get away, asked no questions, but swung himself into the saddle.
they rode far without meeting any adventures, but at length they came to an ant-hill, and the horse stopped.
"crumble those three loaves for the ants," he said.
but jose hesitated.
"why, we may want them ourselves!"
answered he.
"never mind that; give them to the ants all the same.
do not lose a chance of helping others."
and when the loaves lay in crumbs on the road, the horse galloped on.
by-and-by they entered a rocky pass between two mountains, and here they saw an eagle which had been caught in a hunter's net.
"get down and cut the meshes of the net, and set the poor bird free," said the horse.
"but it will take so long," objected jose, "and we may miss the princess."
"never mind that; do not lose a chance of helping others," answered the horse.
and when the meshes were cut, and the eagle was free, the horse galloped on.
the had ridden many miles, and at last they came to a river, where they beheld a little fish lying gasping on the sand, and the horse said: "do you see that little fish?
it will die if you do not put it back in the water."
"but, really, we shall never find the princess bella-flor if we waste our time like this!"
cried jose.
"we never waste time when we are helping others," answered the horse.
and soon the little fish was swimming happily away.
a little while after they reached a castle, which was built in the middle of a very thick wood, and right in front was the princess bella-flor feeding her hens.
"now listen," said the horse."
i am going to give all sorts of little hops and skips, which will amuse the princess bella-flor.
then she will tell you that she would like to ride a little way, and you must help her to mount.
when she is seated i shall begin to neigh and kick, and you must say that i have never carried a woman before, and that you had better get up behind so as to be able to manage me.
once on my back we will go like the wind to the king's palace."
jose did exactly as the horse told him, and everything fell out as the animal prophesied; so that it was not until they were galloping breathlessly towards the palace that the princess knew that she was taken captive.
she said nothing, however, but quietly opened her apron which contained the bran for the chickens, and in a moment it lay scattered on the ground.
"oh, i have let fall my bran!"
cried she; "please get down and pick it up for me."
but jose only answered: "we shall find plenty of bran where we are going."
and the horse galloped on.
they were now passing through a forest, and the princess took out her handkerchief and threw it upwards, so that it stuck in one of the topmost branches of a tree.
"dear me; how stupid!
i have let my handkerchief blow away," said she.
"will you climb up and get it for me?"
but jose answered: "we shall find plenty of handkerchiefs where we are going."
and the horse galloped on.
after the wood they reached a river, and the princess slipped a ring off her finger and let it roll into the water.
"how careless of me," gasped she, beginning to sob."
i have lost my favourite ring; do stop for a moment and look if you can see it."
but jose answered: "you will find plenty of rings where you are going."
and the horse galloped on.
at last they entered the palace gates, and the king's heart bounded with joy at beholding his beloved princess bella-flor.
but the princess brushed him aside as if he had been a fly, and locked herself into the nearest room, which she would not open for all his entreaties.
"bring me the three things i lost on the way, and perhaps i may think about it," was all she would say.
and, in despair, the king was driven to take counsel of jose.
"there is no remedy that i can see," said his majesty, "but that you, who know where they are, should go and bring them back.
and if you return without them i will have you drowned."
poor jose was much troubled at these words.
he thought that he had done all that was required of him, and that his life was safe.
however, he bowed low, and went out to consult his friend the horse.
"do not vex yourself," said the horse, when he had heard the story; "jump up, and we will go and look for the things."
and jose mounted at once.
they rode on till they came to the ant-hill, and then the horse asked: "would you like to have the bran?"
"what is the use of liking?"
answered jose.
"well, call the ants, and tell them to fetch it for you; and, if some of it has been scattered by the wind, to bring in its stead the grains that were in the cakes you gave them."
jose listened in surprise.
he did not much believe in the horse's plan; but he could not think of anything better, so he called to the ants, and bade them collect the bran as fast as they could.
then he saw under a tree and waited, while his horse cropped the green turf.
"look there!"
said the animal, suddenly raising its head; and jose looked behind him and saw a little mountain of bran, which he put into a bag that was hung over his saddle.
"good deeds bear fruit sooner or later," observed the horse; "but mount again, as we have far to go."
when they arrived at the tree, they saw the handkerchief fluttering like a flag from the topmost branch, and jose's spirits sank again.
"how am i to get that handkerchief?"
cried he; "why i should need jacob's ladder!"
but the horse answered: "do not be frightened; call to the eagle you set free from the net, he will bring it to you."
so jose called to the eagle, and the eagle flew to the top of the tree and brought back the handkerchief in its beak.
jose thanked him, and vaulting on his horse they rode on to the river.
a great deal of rain had fallen in the night, and the river, instead of being clear as it was before, was dark and troubled.
"how am i to fetch the ring from the bottom of this river when i do not know exactly where it was dropped, and can not even see it?"
asked jose.
but the horse answered: "do not be frightened; call the little fish whose life you saved, and she will bring it to you."
so he called to the fish, and the fish dived to the bottom and slipped behind big stones, and moved little ones with its tail till it found the ring, and brought it to jose in its mouth.
well pleased with all he had done, jose returned to the palace; but when the king took the precious objects to bella-flor, she declared that she would never open her door till the bandit who had carried her off had been fried in oil."
i am very sorry," said the king to jose," i really would rather not; but you see i have no choice."
while the oil was being heated in the great caldron, jose went to the stables to inquire of his friend the horse if there was no way for him to escape.
"do not be frightened," said the horse.
"get on my back, and i will gallop till my whole body is wet with perspiration, then rub it all over your skin, and no matter how hot the oil may be you will never feel it."
jose did not ask any more questions, but did as the horse bade him; and men wondered at his cheerful face as they lowered him into the caldron of boiling oil.
he was left there till bella-flor cried that he must be cooked enough.
then out came a youth so young and handsome, that everyone fell in love with him, and bella-flor most of all.
as for the old king, he saw that he had lost the game; and in despair he flung himself into the caldron, and was fried instead of jose.
then jose was proclaimed king, on condition that he married bella-flor which he promised to do the next day.
but first he went to the stables and sought out the horse, and said to him: "it is to you that i owe my life and my crown.
why have you done all this for me?"
and the horse answered: "i am the soul of that unhappy man for whom you spent all your fortune.
and when i saw you in danger of death i begged that i might help you, as you had helped me.
for, as i told you, good deeds bear their own fruit!"
the bird of truth -lsb- from cuentos, oraciones, y adivinas, por fernan caballero. -rsb-
once upon a time there lived a poor fisher who built a hut on the banks of a stream which, shunning the glare of the sun and the noise of the towns, flowed quietly past trees and under bushes, listening to the songs of the birds overhead.
one day, when the fisherman had gone out as usual to cast his nets, he saw borne towards him on the current a cradle of crystal.
slipping his net quickly beneath it he drew it out and lifted the silk coverlet.
inside, lying on a soft bed of cotton, were two babies, a boy and a girl, who opened their eyes and smiled at him.
the man was filled with pity at the sight, and throwing down his lines he took the cradle and the babies home to his wife.
the good woman flung up her hands in despair when she beheld the contents of the cradle.
"are not eight children enough," she cried, "without bringing us two more?
how do you think we can feed them?"
"you would not have had me leave them to die of hunger," answered he, "or be swallowed up by the waves of the sea?
what is enough for eight is also enough for ten."
the wife said no more; and in truth her heart yearned over the little creatures.
somehow or other food was never lacking in the hut, and the children grew up and were so good and gentle that, in time, their foster-parents loved them as well or better than their own, who were quarrelsome and envious.
it did not take the orphans long to notice that the boys did not like them, and were always playing tricks on them, so they used to go away by themselves and spend whole hours by the banks of the river.
here they would take out the bits of bread they had saved from their breakfasts and crumble them for the birds.
in return, the birds taught them many things: how to get up early in the morning, how to sing, and how to talk their language, which very few people know.
but though the little orphans did their best to avoid quarrelling with their foster-brothers, it was very difficult always to keep the peace.
matters got worse and worse till, one morning, the eldest boy said to the twins: "it is all very well for you to pretend that you have such good manners, and are so much better than we, but we have at least a father and mother, while you have only got the river, like the toads and the frogs."
the poor children did not answer the insult; but it made them very unhappy.
and they told each other in whispers that they could not stay there any longer, but must go into the world and seek their fortunes.
so next day they arose as early as the birds and stole downstairs without anybody hearing them.
one window was open, and they crept softly out and ran to the side of the river.
then, feeling as if they had found a friend, they walked along its banks, hoping that by-and-by they should meet some one to take care of them.
the whole of that day they went steadily on without seeing a living creature, till, in the evening, weary and footsore, they saw before them a small hut.
this raised their spirits for a moment; but the door was shut, and the hut seemed empty, and so great was their disappointment that they almost cried.
however, the boy fought down his tears, and said cheerfully: "well, at any rate here is a bench where we can sit down, and when we are rested we will think what is best to do next."
then they sat down, and for some time they were too tired even to notice anything; but by-and-by they saw that under the tiles of the roof a number of swallows were sitting, chattering merrily to each other.
of course the swallows had no idea that the children understood their language, or they would not have talked so freely; but, as it was, they said whatever came into their heads.
"good evening, my fine city madam," remarked a swallow, whose manners were rather rough and countryfied to another who looked particularly distinguished.
"happy, indeed, are the eyes that behold you!
only think of your having returned to your long-forgotten country friends, after you have lived for years in a palace!'"
i have inherited this nest from my parents," replied the other, "and as they left it to me i certainly shall make it my home.
but," she added politely," i hope that you and all your family are well?"
"very well indeed, i am glad to say.
but my poor daughter had, a short time ago, such bad inflammation in her eyes that she would have gone blind had i not been able to find the magic herb, which cured her at once."
"and how is the nightingale singing?
does the lark soar as high as ever?
and does the linnet dress herself as smartly?"
but here the country swallow drew herself up."
i never talk gossip," she said severely.
"our people, who were once so innocent and well-behaved, have been corrupted by the bad examples of men.
it is a thousand pities."
"what!
innocence and good behaviour are not to be met with among birds, nor in the country!
my dear friend, what are you saying?"
"the truth and nothing more.
imagine, when we returned here, we met some linnets who, just as the spring and the flowers and the long days had come, were setting out for the north and the cold?
out of pure compassion we tried to persuade them to give up this folly; but they only replied with the utmost insolence."
"how shocking!"
exclaimed the city swallow.
"yes, it was.
and worse than that, the crested lark, that was formerly so timid and shy, is now no better than a thief, and steals maize and corn whenever she can find them.'"
i am astonished at what you say."
"you will be more astonished when i tell you that on my arrival here for the summer i found my nest occupied by a shameless sparrow!
""this is my nest," i said.
""yours?"
he answered, with a rude laugh.
""yes, mine; my ancestors were born here, and my sons will be born here also."
and at that my husband set upon him and threw him out of the nest.
i am sure nothing of this sort ever happens in a town."
"not exactly, perhaps.
but i have seen a great deal -- if you only knew!"
"oh!
do tell us!
do tell us!"
cried they all.
and when they had settled themselves comfortably, the city swallow began: "you must know, then that our king fell in love with the youngest daughter of a tailor, who was as good and gentle as she was beautiful.
his nobles hoped that he would have chosen a queen from one of their daughters, and tried to prevent the marriage; but the king would not listen to them, and it took place.
not many months later a war broke out, and the king rode away at the head of his army, while the queen remained behind, very unhappy at the separation.
when peace was made, and the king returned, he was told that his wife had had two babies in his absence, but that both were dead; that she herself had gone out of her mind and was obliged to be shut up in a tower in the mountains, where, in time, the fresh air might cure her."
"and was this not true?"
asked the swallows eagerly.
"of course not," answered the city lady, with some contempt for their stupidity.
"the children were alive at that very moment in the gardener's cottage; but at night the chamberlain came down and put them in a cradle of crystal, which he carried to the river.
"for a whole day they floated safely, for though the stream was deep it was very still, and the children took no harm.
in the morning -- so i am told by my friend the kingfisher -- they were rescued by a fisherman who lived near the river bank."
the children had been lying on the bench, listening lazily to the chatter up to this point; but when they heard the story of the crystal cradle which their foster-mother had always been fond of telling them, they sat upright and looked at each other.
"oh, how glad i am i learnt the birds" language!"
said the eyes of one to the eyes of the other.
meanwhile the swallows had spoken again.
"that was indeed good fortune!"
cried they.
"and when the children are grown up they can return to their father and set their mother free."
"it will not be so easy as you think," answered the city swallow, shaking her head; "for they will have to prove that they are the king's children, and also that their mother never went mad at all.
in fact, it is so difficult that there is only one way of proving it to the king."
"and what is that?"
cried all the swallows at once.
"and how do you know it?'"
i know it," answered the city swallow, "because, one day, when i was passing through the palace garden, i met a cuckoo, who, as i need not tell you, always pretends to be able to see into the future.
we began to talk about certain things which were happening in the palace, and of the events of past years.
""ah," said he, "the only person who can expose the wickedness of the ministers and show the king how wrong he has been, is the bird of truth, who can speak the language of men.""
""and where can this bird be found?"
i asked."
""it is shut up in a castle guarded by a fierce giant, who only sleeps one quarter of an hour out of the whole twenty-four," replied the cuckoo.
"and where is this castle?"
inquired the country swallow, who, like all the rest, and the children most of all, had been listening with deep attention.
"that is just what i do n't know," answered her friend.
"all i can tell you is that not far from here is a tower, where dwells an old witch, and it is she who knows the way, and she will only teach it to the person who promises to bring her the water from the fountain of many colours, which she uses for her enchantments.
but never will she betray the place where the bird of truth is hidden, for she hates him, and would kill him if she could; knowing well, however, that this bird can not die, as he is immortal, she keeps him closely shut up, and guarded night and day by the birds of bad faith, who seek to gag him so that his voice should not be heard."
"and is there no one else who can tell the poor boy where to find the bird, if he should ever manage to reach the tower?"
asked the country swallow.
"no one," replied the city swallow, "except an owl, who lives a hermit's life in that desert, and he knows only one word of man's speech, and that is "cross."
so that even if the prince did succeed in getting there, he could never understand what the owl said.
but, look, the sun is sinking to his nest in the depths of the sea, and i must go to mine.
good-night, friends, good-night!"
then the swallow flew away, and the children, who had forgotten both hunger and weariness in the joy of this strange news, rose up and followed in the direction of her flight.
after two hours" walking, they arrived at a large city, which they felt sure must be the capital of their father's kingdom.
seeing a good-natured looking woman standing at the door of a house, they asked her if she would give them a night's lodging, and she was so pleased with their pretty faces and nice manners that she welcomed them warmly.
it was scarcely light the next morning before the girl was sweeping out the rooms, and the boy watering the garden, so that by the time the good woman came downstairs there was nothing left for her to do.
this so delighted her that she begged the children to stay with her altogether, and the boy answered that he would leave his sisters with her gladly, but that he himself had serious business on hand and must not linger in pursuit of it.
so he bade them farewell and set out.
for three days he wandered by the most out-of-the-way paths, but no signs of a tower were to be seen anywhere.
on the fourth morning it was just the same, and, filled with despair, he flung himself on the ground under a tree and hid his face in his hands.
in a little while he heard a rustling over his head, and looking up, he saw a turtle dove watching him with her bright eyes.
"oh dove!"
cried the boy, addressing the bird in her own language, "oh dove!
tell me, i pray you, where is the castle of come-and-never-go?"
"poor child," answered the dove, "who has sent you on such a useless quest?"
"my good or evil fortune," replied the boy," i know not which."
"to get there," said the dove, "you must follow the wind, which to-day is blowing towards the castle."
the boy thanked her, and followed the wind, fearing all the time that it might change its direction and lead him astray.
but the wind seemed to feel pity for him and blew steadily on.
with each step the country became more and more dreary, but at nightfall the child could see behind the dark and bare rocks something darker still.
this was the tower in which dwelt the witch; and seizing the knocker he gave three loud knocks, which were echoed in the hollows of the rocks around.
the door opened slowly, and there appeared on the threshold an old woman holding up a candle to her face, which was so hideous that the boy involuntarily stepped backwards, almost as frightened by the troop of lizards, beetles and such creatures that surrounded her, as by the woman herself.
"who are you who dare to knock at my door and wake me?"
cried she.
"be quick and tell me what you want, or it will be the worse for you."
"madam," answered the child," i believe that you alone know the way to the castle of come-and-never-go, and i pray you to show it to me."
"very good," replied the witch, with something that she meant for a smile, "but to-day it is late.
to-morrow you shall go.
now enter, and you shall sleep with my lizards.'"
i can not stay," said he."
i must go back at once, so as to reach the road from which i started before day dawns."
"if i tell you, will you promise me that you will bring me this jar full of the many-coloured water from the spring in the court-yard of the castle?"
asked she.
"if you fail to keep your word i will change you into a lizard for ever.'"
i promise," answered the boy.
then the old woman called to a very thin dog, and said to him: "conduct this pig of a child to the castle of come-and-never-go, and take care that you warn my friend of his arrival."
and the dog arose and shook itself, and set out.
at the end of two hours they stopped in front of a large castle, big and black and gloomy, whose doors stood wide open, although neither sound nor light gave sign of any presence within.
the dog, however, seemed to know what to expect, and, after a wild howl, went on; but the boy, who was uncertain whether this was the quarter of an hour when the giant was asleep, hesitated to follow him, and paused for a moment under a wild olive that grew near by, the only tree which he had beheld since he had parted from the dove.
"oh, heaven, help me!"
cried he.
"cross!
cross!"
answered a voice.
the boy leapt for joy as he recognised the note of the owl of which the swallow had spoken, and he said softly in the bird's language: "oh, wise owl, i pray you to protect and guide me, for i have come in search of the bird of truth.
and first i must fill this far with the many-coloured water in the courtyard of the castle."
"do not do that," answered the owl, "but fill the jar from the spring which bubbles close by the fountain with the many-coloured water.
afterwards, go into the aviary opposite the great door, but be careful not to touch any of the bright-plumaged birds contained in it, which will cry to you, each one, that he is the bird of truth.
choose only a small white bird that is hidden in a corner, which the others try incessantly to kill, not knowing that it can not die.
and, be quick!
-- for at this very moment the giant has fallen asleep, and you have only a quarter of an hour to do everything."
the boy ran as fast as he could and entered the courtyard, where he saw the two spring close together.
he passed by the many-coloured water without casting a glance at it, and filled the jar from the fountain whose water was clear and pure.
he next hastened to the aviary, and was almost deafened by the clamour that rose as he shut the door behind him.
voices of peacocks, voices of ravens, voices of magpies, each claiming to be the bird of truth.
with steadfast face the boy walked by them all, to the corner, where, hemmed in by a hand of fierce crows, was the small white bird he sought.
putting her safely in his breast, he passed out, followed by the screams of the birds of bad faith which he left behind him.
once outside, he ran without stopping to the witch's tower, and handed to the old woman the jar she had given him.
"become a parrot!"
cried she, flinging the water over him.
but instead of losing his shape, as so many had done before, he only grew ten times handsomer; for the water was enchanted for good and not ill.
then the creeping multitude around the witch hastened to roll themselves in the water, and stood up, human beings again.
when the witch saw what was happening, she took a broomstick and flew away.
who can guess the delight of the sister at the sight of her brother, bearing the bird of truth?
but although the boy had accomplished much, something very difficult yet remained, and that was how to carry the bird of truth to the king without her being seized by the wicked courtiers, who would be ruined by the discovery of their plot.
soon -- no one knew how -- the news spread abroad that the bird of truth was hovering round the palace, and the courtiers made all sorts of preparations to hinder her reaching the king.
they got ready weapons that were sharpened, and weapons that were poisoned; they sent for eagles and falcons to hunt her down, and constructed cages and boxes in which to shut her up if they were not able to kill her.
they declared that her white plumage was really put on to hide her black feathers -- in fact there was nothing they did not do in order to prevent the king from seeing the bird or from paying attention to her words if he did.
as often happens in these cases, the courtiers brought about that which they feared.
they talked so much about the bird of truth that at last the king heard of it, and expressed a wish to see her.
the more difficulties that were put in his way the stronger grew his desire, and in the end the king published a proclamation that whoever found the bird of truth should bring her to him without delay.
as soon as he saw this proclamation the boy called his sister, and they hastened to the palace.
the bird was buttoned inside his tunic, but, as might have been expected, the courtiers barred the way, and told the child that he could not enter.
it was in vain that the boy declared that he was only obeying the king's commands; the courtiers only replied that his majesty was not yet out of bed, and it was forbidden to wake him.
they were still talking, when, suddenly, the bird settled the question by flying upwards through an open window into the king's own room.
alighting on the pillow, close to the king's head, she bowed respectfully, and said: "my lord, i am the bird of truth whom you wished to see, and i have been obliged to approach you in the manner because the boy who brought me is kept out of the palace by your courtiers."
"they shall pay for their insolence," said the king.
and he instantly ordered one of his attendants to conduct the boy at once to his apartments; and in a moment more the prince entered, holding his sister by the hand.
"who are you?"
asked the king; "and what has the bird of truth to do with you?"
"if it please your majesty, the bird of truth will explain that herself," answered the boy.
and the bird did explain; and the king heard for the first time of the wicked plot that had been successful for so many years.
he took his children in his arms, with tears in his eyes, and hurried off with them to the tower in the mountains where the queen was shut up.
the poor woman was as white as marble, for she had been living almost in darkness; but when she saw her husband and children, the colour came back to her face, and she was as beautiful as ever.
they all returned in state to the city, where great rejoicings were held.
the wicked courtiers had their heads cut off, and all their property was taken away.
as for the good old couple, they were given riches and honour, and were loved and cherished to the end of their lives.
the mink and the wolf -lsb- from cuentos, oraciones y adivinas, por fernan caballero. -rsb-
in a big forest in the north of america lived a quantity of wild animals of all sorts.
they were always very polite when they met; but, in spite of that, they kept a close watch one upon the other, as each was afraid of being killed and eaten by somebody else.
but their manners were so good that no one would ever had guessed that.
one day a smart young wolf went out to hunt, promising his grandfather and grandmother that he would be sure to be back before bedtime.
he trotted along quite happily through the forest till he came to a favourite place of his, just where the river runs into the sea.
there, just as he had hoped, he saw the chief mink fishing in a canoe."
i want to fish too," cried the wolf.
but the mink said nothing and pretended not to hear."
i wish you would take me into your boat!"
shouted the wolf, louder than before, and he continued to beseech the mink so long that at last he grew tired of it, and paddled to the shore close enough for the wolf to jump in.
"sit down quietly at that end or we shall be upset," said the mink; "and if you care about sea-urchins" eggs, you will find plenty in that basket.
but be sure you eat only the white ones, for the red ones would kill you."
so the wolf, who was always hungry, began to eat the eggs greedily; and when he had finished he told the mink he thought he would have a nap.
"well, then, stretch yourself out, and rest your head on that piece of wood," said the mink.
and the wolf did as he was bid, and was soon fast asleep.
then the mink crept up to him and stabbed him to the heart with his knife, and he died without moving.
after that he landed on the beach, skinned the wolf, and taking the skin to his cottage, he hung it up before the fire to dry.
not many days later the wolf's grandmother, who, with the help of her relations, had been searching for him everywhere, entered the cottage to buy some sea-urchins" eggs, and saw the skin, which she at once guessed to be that of her grandson."
i knew he was dead -- i knew it!
i knew it!"
she cried, weeping bitterly, till the mink told her rudely that if she wanted to make so much noise she had better do it outside as he liked to be quiet.
so, half-blinded by her tears, the old woman went home the way she had come, and running in at the door, she flung herself down in front of the fire.
"what are you crying for?"
asked the old wolf and some friends who had been spending the afternoon with him."
i shall never see my grandson any more!"
answered she.
"mink has killed him, oh!
oh!"
and putting her head down, she began to weep as loudly as ever.
"there!
there!"
said her husband, laying his paw on her shoulder.
"be comforted; if he is dead, we will avenge him."
and calling to the others they proceeded to talk over the best plan.
it took them a long time to make up their minds, as one wolf proposed one thing and one another; but at last it was agreed that the old wolf should give a great feast in his house, and that the mink should be invited to the party.
and in order that no time should be lost it was further agreed that each wolf should bear the invitations to the guests that lived nearest to him.
now the wolves thought they were very cunning, but the mink was more cunning still; and though he sent a message by a white hare, that was going that way, saying he should be delighted to be present, he determined that he would take his precautions.
so he went to a mouse who had often done him a good turn, and greeted her with his best bow."
i have a favour to ask of you, friend mouse," said he, "and if you will grant it i will carry you on my back every night for a week to the patch of maize right up the hill."
"the favour is mine," answered the mouse.
"tell me what it is that i can have the honour of doing for you."
"oh, something quite easy," replied the mink."
i only want you -- between to-day and the next full moon -- to gnaw through the bows and paddles of the wolf people, so that directly they use them they will break.
but of course you must manage it so that they notice nothing."
"of course," answered the mouse, "nothing is easier; but as the full moon is to-morrow night, and there is not much time, i had better begin at once."
then the mink thanked her, and went his way; but before he had gone far he came back again.
"perhaps, while you are about the wolf's house seeing after the bows, it would do no harm if you were to make that knot-hole in the wall a little bigger," said he.
"not large enough to draw attention, of course; but it might come in handy."
and with another nod he left her.
the next evening the mink washed and brushed himself carefully and set out for the feast.
he smiled to himself as he looked at the dusty track, and perceived that though the marks of wolves" feet were many, not a single guest was to be seen anywhere.
he knew very well what that meant; but he had taken his precautions and was not afraid.
the house door stood open, but through a crack the mink could see the wolves crowding in the corner behind it.
however, he entered boldly, and as soon as he was fairly inside the door was shut with a bang, and the whole herd sprang at him, with their red tongues hanging out of their mouths.
quick as they were they were too late, for the mink was already through the knot-hole and racing for his canoe.
the knot-hole was too small for the wolves, and there were so many of them in the hut that it was some time before they could get the door open.
then they seized the bows and arrows which were hanging on the walls and, once outside, aimed at the flying mink; but as they pulled the bows broke in their paws, so they threw them away, and bounded to the shore, with all their speed, to the place where their canoes were drawn up on the beach.
now, although the mink could not run as fast as the wolves, he had a good start, and was already afloat when the swiftest among them threw themselves into the nearest canoe.
they pushed off, but as they dipped the paddles into the water, they snapped as the bows had done, and were quite useless."
i know where there are some new ones," cried a young fellow, leaping on shore and rushing to a little cave at the back of the beach.
and the mink's heart smote him when he heard, for he had not known of this secret store.
after a long chase the wolves managed to surround their prey, and the mink, seeing it was no good resisting any more, gave himself up.
some of the elder wolves brought out some cedar bands, which they always carried wound round their bodies, but the mink laughed scornfully at the sight of them.
"why i could snap those in a moment," said he; "if you want to make sure that i can not escape, better take a line of kelp and bind me with that."
"you are right," answered the grandfather; "your wisdom is greater than ours."
and he bade his servants gather enough kelp from the rocks to make a line, as they had brought none with them.
"while the line is being made you might as well let me have one last dance," remarked the mink.
and the wolves replied: "very good, you may have your dance; perhaps it may amuse us as well as you."
so they brought two canoes and placed them one beside the other.
the mink stood up on his hind legs and began to dance, first in one canoe and then in the other; and so graceful was he, that the wolves forgot they were going to put him to death, and howled with pleasure.
"pull the canoes a little apart; they are too close for this new dance," he said, pausing for a moment.
and the wolves separated them while he gave a series of little springs, sometime pirouetting while he stood with one foot on the prow of both.
"now nearer, now further apart," he would cry as the dance went on.
"no!
further still."
and springing into the air, amidst howls of applause, he came down head-foremost, and dived to the bottom.
and through the wolves, whose howls had now changed into those of rage, sought him everywhere, they never found him, for he hid behind a rock till they were out of sight, and then made his home in another forest.
adventures of an indian brave -lsb- from the journal of the anthropological institute. -rsb-
a long, long way off, right away in the west of america, there once lived an old man who had one son.
the country round was covered with forests, in which dwelt all kinds of wild beasts, and the young man and his companions used to spend whole days in hunting them, and he was the finest hunter of all the tribe.
one morning, when winter was coming on, the youth and his companions set off as usual to bring back some of the mountain goats and deer to be salted down, as he was afraid of a snow-storm; and if the wind blew and the snow drifted the forest might be impassable for some weeks.
the old man and the wife, however, would not go out, but remained in the wigwam making bows and arrows.
it soon grew so cold in the forest that at last one of the men declared they could walk no more, unless they could manage to warm themselves.
"that is easily done," said the leader, giving a kick to a large tree.
flames broke out in the trunk, and before it had burnt up they were as hot as if it had been summer.
then they started off to the place where the goats and deer were to be found in the greatest numbers, and soon had killed as many as they wanted.
but the leader killed most, as he was the best shot.
"now we must cut up the game and divide it," said he; and so they did, each one taking his own share; and, walking one behind the other, set out for the village.
but when they reached a great river the young man did not want the trouble of carrying his pack any further, and left it on the bank."
i am going home another way," he told his companions.
and taking another road he reached the village long before they did.
"have you returned with empty hands?"
asked the old man, as his son opened the door.
"have i ever done that, that you put me such a question?"
asked the youth.
"no; i have slain enough to feast us for many moons, but it was heavy, and i left the pack on the bank of the great river.
give me the arrows, i will finish making them, and you can go to the river and bring home the pack!"
so the old man rose and went, and strapped the meat on his shoulder; but as he was crossing the ford the strap broke and the pack fell into the river.
he stooped to catch it, but it swirled past him.
he clutched again; but in doing so he over-balanced himself and was hurried into some rapids, where he was knocked against some rocks, and he sank and was drowned, and his body was carried down the stream into smoother water when it rose to the surface again.
but by this time it had lost all likeness to a man, and was changed into a piece of wood.
the wood floated on, and the river got bigger and bigger and entered a new country.
there it was borne by the current close to the shore, and a woman who was down there washing her clothes caught it as it passed, and drew it out, saying to herself: "what a nice smooth plank!
i will use it as a table to put my food upon."
and gathering up her clothes she took the plank with her into her hut.
when her supper time came she stretched the board across two strings which hung from the roof, and set upon it the pot containing a stew that smelt very good.
the woman had been working hard all day and was very hungry, so she took her biggest spoon and plunged it into the pot.
but what was her astonishment and disgust when both pot and food vanished instantly before her!
"oh, you horrid plank, you have brought me ill-luck!"
she cried.
and taking it up she flung it away from her.
the woman had been surprised before at the disappearance of her food, but she was more astonished still when, instead of the plank, she beheld a baby.
however, she was fond of children and had none of her own, so she made up her mind that she would keep it and take care of it.
the baby grew and throve as no baby in that country had ever done, and in four days he was a man, and as tall and strong as any brave of the tribe.
"you have treated me well," he said, "and meat shall never fail to your house.
but now i must go, for i have much work to do."
then he set out for his home.
it took him many days to get there, and when he saw his son sitting in his place his anger was kindled, and his heart was stirred to take vengeance upon him.
so he went out quickly into the forest and shed tears, and each tear became a bird.
"stay there till i want you," said he; and he returned to the hut."
i saw some pretty new birds, high up in a tree yonder," he remarked.
and the son answered: "show me the way and i will get them for dinner."
the two went out together, and after walking for about half an hour they old man stopped.
"that is the tree," he said.
and the son began to climb it.
now a strange thing happened.
the higher the young man climbed the higher the birds seemed to be, and when he looked down the earth below appeared no bigger than a star.
sill he tried to go back, but he could not, and though he could not see the birds any longer he felt as if something were dragging him up and up.
he thought that he had been climbing that tree for days, and perhaps he had, for suddenly a beautiful country, yellow with fields of maize, stretched before him, and he gladly left the top of the tree and entered it.
he walked through the maize without knowing where he was going, when he heard a sound of knocking, and saw two old blind women crushing their food between two stones.
he crept up to them on tiptoe, and when one old woman passed her dinner to the other he held out his hand and took it and ate if for himself.
"how slow you are kneading that cake," cried the other old woman at last.
"why, i have given you your dinner, and what more do you want?"
replied the second.
"you did n't; at least i never got it," said the other."
i certainly thought you took it from me; but here is some more."
and again the young man stretched out his hand; and the two old women fell to quarrelling afresh.
but when it happened for the third time the old women suspected some trick, and one of them exclaimed: "i am sure there is a man here; tell me, are you not my grandson?"
"yes," answered the young man, who wished to please her, "and in return for your good dinner i will see if i can not restore your sight; for i was taught in the art of healing by the best medicine man in the tribe."
and with that he left them, and wandered about till he found the herb which he wanted.
then he hastened back to the old women, and begging them to boil him some water, he threw the herb in.
as soon as the pot began to sing he took off the lid, and sprinkled the eyes of the women, and sight came back to them once more.
there was no night in that country, so, instead of going to bed very early, as he would have done in his own hut, the young man took another walk.
a splashing noise near by drew him down to a valley through which ran a large river, and up a waterfall some salmon were leaping.
how their silver sides glistened in the light, and how he longed to catch some of the great fellows!
but how could he do it?
he had beheld no one except the old women, and it was not very likely that they would be able to help him.
so with a sigh he turned away and went back to them, but, as he walked, a thought struck him.
he pulled out one of his hairs which hung nearly to his waist, and it instantly became a strong line, nearly a mile in length.
"weave me a net that i may catch some salmon," said he.
and they wove him the net he asked for, and for many weeks he watched by the river, only going back to the old women when he wanted a fish cooked.
at last, one day, when he was eating his dinner, the old woman who always spoke first, said to him: "we have been very glad to see you, grandson, but now it is time that you went home."
and pushing aside a rock, he saw a deep hole, so deep that he could not see to the bottom.
then they dragged a basket out of the house, and tied a rope to it.
"get in, and wrap this blanket round your head," said they; "and, whatever happens, do n't uncover it till you get to the bottom."
then they bade him farewell, and he curled himself up in the basket.
down, down, down he went; would he ever stop going?
but when the basket did stop, the young man forgot what he had been told, and put his head out to see what was the matter.
in an instant the basket moved, but, to his horror, instead of going down, he felt himself being drawn upwards, and shortly after he beheld the faces of the old women.
"you will never see your wife and son if you will not do as you are bid," said they.
"now get in, and do not stir till you hear a crow calling."
this time the young man was wiser, and though the basket often stopped, and strange creatures seemed to rest on him and to pluck at his blanket, he held it tight till he heard the crow calling.
then he flung off the blanket and sprang out, while the basket vanished in the sky.
he walked on quickly down the track that led to the hut, when, before him, he saw his wife with his little son on her back.
"oh!
there is father at last," cried the boy; but the mother bade him cease from idle talking.
"but, mother, it is true; father is coming!"
repeated the child.
and, to satisfy him, the woman turned round and perceived her husband.
oh, how glad they all were to be together again!
and when the wind whistled through the forest, and the snow stood in great banks round the door, the father used to take the little boy on his knee and tell him how he caught salmon in the land of the sun.
how the stalos were tricked -lsb- from the journal of the anthropological institute. -rsb-
"mother, i have seen such a wonderful man," said a little boy one day, as he entered a hut in lapland, bearing in his arms the bundle of sticks he had been sent out to gather.
"have you, my son; and what was he like?"
asked the mother, as she took off the child's sheepskin coat and shook it on the doorstep.
"well, i was tired of stooping for the sticks, and was leaning against a tree to rest, when i heard a noise of "sh - "sh, among the dead leaves.
i thought perhaps it was a wolf, so i stood very still.
but soon there came past a tall man -- oh!
twice as tall as father -- with a long red beard and a red tunic fastened with a silver girdle, from which hung a silver-handled knife.
behind him followed a great dog, which looked stronger than any wolf, or even a bear.
but why are you so pale, mother?"
"it was the stalo," replied she, her voice trembling; "stalo the man-eater!
you did well to hide, or you might never had come back.
but, remember that, though he is so tall and strong, he is very stupid, and many a lapp has escaped from his clutches by playing him some clever trick."
not long after the mother and son had held this talk, it began to be whispered in the forest that the children of an old man called patto had vanished one by one, no one knew whither.
the unhappy father searched the country for miles round without being able to find as much as a shoe or a handkerchief, to show him where they had passed, but at length a little boy came with news that he had seen the stalo hiding behind a well, near which the children used to play.
the boy had waited behind a clump of bushes to see what would happen, and by-and-by he noticed that the stalo had laid a cunning trap in the path to the well, and that anybody who fell over it would roll into the water and drown there.
and, as he watched, patto's youngest daughter ran gaily down the path, till her foot caught in the strings that were stretched across the steepest place.
she slipped and fell, and in another instant had rolled into the water within reach of the stalo.
as soon as patto heard this tale his heart was filled with rage, and he vowed to have his revenge.
so he straightway took an old fur coat from the hook where it hung, and putting it on went out into the forest.
when he reached the path that led to the well he looked hastily round to be sure that no one was watching him, then laid himself down as if he had been caught in the snare and had rolled into the well, though he took care to keep his head out of the water.
very soon he heard a "sh - "sh of the leaves, and there was the stalo pushing his way through the undergrowth to see what chance he had of a dinner.
at the first glimpse of patto's head in the well he laughed loudly, crying: "ha!
ha!
this time it is the old ass!
i wonder how he will taste?"
and drawing patto out of the well, he flung him across his shoulders and carried him home.
then he tied a cord round him and hung him over the fire to roast, while he finished a box that he was making before the door of the hut, which he meant to hold patto's flesh when it was cooked.
in a very short time the box was so nearly done that it only wanted a little more chipping out with an axe; but this part of the work was easier accomplished indoors, and he called to one of his sons who were lounging inside to bring him the tool.
the young man looked everywhere, but he could not find the axe, for the very good reason that patto had managed to pick it up and hide it in his clothes.
"stupid fellow!
what is the use of you?"
grumbled his father angrily; and he bade first one and then another of his sons to fetch him the tool, but they had no better success than their brother."
i must come myself, i suppose!"
said stalo, putting aside the box.
but, meanwhile, patto had slipped from the hook and concealed himself behind the door, so that, as stalo stepped in, his prisoner raised the axe, and with one blow the ogre's head was rolling on the ground.
his sons were so frightened at the sight that they all ran away.
and in this manner patto avenged his dead children.
but though stalo was dead, his three sons were still living, and not very far off either.
they had gone to their mother, who was tending some reindeer on the pastures, and told her that by some magic, they knew not what, their father's head had rolled from his body, and they had been so afraid that something dreadful would happen to them that they had come to take refuge with her.
the ogress said nothing.
long ago she had found out how stupid her sons were, so she just sent them out to milk the reindeer, while she returned to the other house to bury her husband's body.
now, three days" journey from the hut on the pastures two brothers sodno dwelt in a small cottage with their sister lyma, who tended a large herd of reindeer while they were out hunting.
of late it had been whispered from one to another that the three young stalos were to be seen on the pastures, but the sodno brothers did not disturb themselves, the danger seemed too far away.
unluckily, however, one day, when lyma was left by herself in the hut, the three stalos came down and carried her and the reindeer off to their own cottage.
the country was very lonely, and perhaps no one would have known in which direction she had gone had not the girl managed to tie a ball of thread to the handle of a door at the back of the cottage and let it trail behind her.
of course the ball was not long enough to go all the way, but it lay on the edge of a snowy track which led straight to the stalos" house.
when the brothers returned from their hunting they found both the hut and the sheds empty.
loudly they cried: "lyma!
lyma!"
but no voice answered them; and they fell to searching all about, lest perchance their sister might have dropped some clue to guide them.
at length their eyes dropped on the thread which lay on the snow, and they set out to follow it.
on and on they went, and when at length the thread stopped the brothers knew that another day's journey would bring them to the stalos" dwelling.
of course they did not dare to approach it openly, for the stalos had the strength of giants, and besides, there were three of them; so the two sodnos climbed into a big bushy tree which overhung a well.
"perhaps our sister may be sent to draw water here," they said to each other.
but it was not till the moon had risen that the sister came, and as she let down her bucket into the well, the leaves seemed to whisper "lyma!
lyma!"
the girl started and looked up, but could see nothing, and in a moment the voice came again.
"be careful -- take no notice, fill your buckets, but listen carefully all the while, and we will tell you what to do so that you may escape yourself and set free the reindeer also."
so lyman bent over the well lower than before, and seemed busier than ever.
"you know," said her brother, "that when a stalo finds that anything has been dropped into his food he will not eat a morsel, but throws it to his dogs.
now, after the pot has been hanging some time over the fire, and the broth is nearly cooked, just rake up the log of wood so that some of the ashes fly into the pot.
the stalo will soon notice this, and will call you to give all the food to the dogs; but, instead, you must bring it straight to us, as it is three days since we have eaten or drunk.
that is all you need do for the present."
then lyma took up her buckets and carried them into the house, and did as her brothers had told her.
they were so hungry that they ate the food up greedily without speaking, but when there was nothing left in the pot, the eldest one said: "listen carefully to what i have to tell you.
after the eldest stalo has cooked and eaten a fresh supper, he will go to bed and sleep so soundly that not even a witch could wake him.
you can hear him snoring a mile off, and then you must go into his room and pull off the iron mantle that covers him, and put it on the fire till it is almost red hot.
when that is done, come to us and we will give you further directions.'"
i will obey you in everything, dear brothers," answered lyman; and so she did.
it had happened that on this very evening the stalos had driven in some of the reindeer from the pasture, and had tied them up to the wall of the house so that they might be handy to kill for next day's dinner.
the two sodnos had seen what they were doing, and where the beasts were secured; so, at midnight, when all was still, they crept down from their tree and seized the reindeer by the horns which were locked together.
the animals were frightened, and began to neigh and kick, as if they were fighting together, and the noise became so great that even the eldest stalo was awakened by it, and that was a thing which had never occurred before.
raising himself in his bed, he called to his youngest brother to go out and separate the reindeer or they would certainly kill themselves.
the young stalo did as he was bid, and left the house; but no sooner was he out of the door than he was stabbed to the heart by one of the sodnos, and fell without a groan.
then they went back to worry the reindeer, and the noise became as great as ever, and a second time the stalo awoke.
"the boy does not seem to be able to part the beasts," he cried to his second brother; "go and help him, or i shall never get to sleep."
so the brother went, and in an instant was struck dead as he left the house by the sword of the eldest sodno.
the stalo waited in bed a little longer for things to get quiet, but as the clatter of the reindeer's horns was as bad as ever, he rose angrily from his bed muttering to himself: "it is extraordinary that they can not unlock themselves; but as no one else seems able to help them i suppose i must go and do it."
rubbing his eyes, he stood up on the floor and stretched his great arms and gave a yawn which shook the walls.
the sodnos heard it below, and posted themselves, one at the big door and one at the little door at the back, for they did not know what their enemy would come out at.
the stalo put out his hand to take his iron mantle from the bed, where it always lay, but the mantle was no there.
he wondered where it could be, and who could have moved it, and after searching through all the rooms, he found it hanging over the kitchen fire.
but the first touch burnt him so badly that he let it alone, and went with nothing, except a stick in his hand, through the back door.
the young sodno was standing ready for him, and as the stalo passed the threshold struck him such a blow on the head that he rolled over with a crash and never stirred again.
the two sodnos did not trouble about him, but quickly stripped the younger stalos of their clothes, in which they dressed themselves.
then they sat still till the dawn should break and they could find out from the stalos" mother where the treasure was hidden.
with the first rays of the sun the young sodno went upstairs and entered the old woman's room.
she was already up and dressed, and sitting by the window knitting, and the young man crept in softly and crouched down on the floor, laying his head on her lap.
for a while he kept silence, then he whispered gently: "tell me, dear mother, where did my eldest brother conceal his riches?"
"what a strange question!
surely you must know," answered she.
"no, i have forgotten; my memory is so bad."
"he dug a hole under the doorstep and placed it there," said she.
and there was another pause.
by-and-by the sodno asked again: "and where may my second brother's money be?"
"do n't you know that either?"
cried the mother in surprise.
"oh, yes; i did once.
but since i fell upon my head i can remember nothing."
"it is behind the oven," answered she.
and again was silence.
"mother, dear mother," said the young man at last," i am almost afraid to ask you; but i really have grown so stupid of late.
where did i hide my own money?"
but at this question the old woman flew into a passion, and vowed that if she could find a rod she would bring his memory back to him.
luckily, no rod was within her reach, and the sodno managed, after a little, to coax her back into good humour, and at length she told him that the youngest stalo had buried his treasure under the very place where she was sitting.
"dear mother," said lyman, who had come in unseen, and was kneeling in front of the fire.
"dear mother, do you know who it is you have been talking with?"
the old woman started, but answered quietly: "it is a sodno, i suppose?"
"you have guessed right," replied lyma.
the mother of the stalos looked round for her iron cane, which she always used to kill her victims, but it was not there, for lyma had put it in the fire.
"where is my iron cane?"
asked the old woman.
"there!"
answered lyma, pointing to the flames.
the old woman sprang forwards and seized it, but her clothes caught fire, and in a few minutes she was burned to ashes.
so the sodno brothers found the treasure, and they carried it, and their sister and the reindeer, to their own home, and were the richest men in all lapland.
andras baive -lsb- from lapplandische marchen, j. c. poestion. -rsb-
once upon a time there lived in lapland a man who was so very strong and swift of foot that nobody in his native town of vadso could come near him if they were running races in the summer evenings.
the people of vadso were very proud of their champion, and thought that there was no one like him in the world, till, by-and-by, it came to their ears that there dwelt among the mountains a lapp, andras baive by name, who was said by his friends to be even stronger and swifter than the bailiff.
of course not a creature in vadso believed that, and declared that if it made the mountaineers happier to talk such nonsense, why, let them!
the winter was long and cold, and the thoughts of the villagers were much busier with wolves than with andras baive, when suddenly, on a frosty day, he made his appearance in the little town of vadso.
the bailiff was delighted at this chance of trying his strength, and at once went out to seek andras and to coax him into giving proof of his vigour.
as he walked along his eyes fell upon a big eight-oared boat that lay upon the shore, and his face shone with pleasure.
"that is the very thing," laughed he," i will make him jump over that boat."
andras was quite ready to accept the challenge, and they soon settled the terms of the wager.
he who could jump over the boat without so much as touching it with his heel was to be the winner, and would get a large sum of money as the prize.
so, followed by many of the villagers, the two men walked down to the sea.
an old fisherman was chosen to stand near the boat to watch fair play, and to hold the stakes, and andras, as the stranger was told to jump first.
going back to the flag which had been stuck into the sand to mark the starting place, he ran forward, with his head well thrown back, and cleared the boat with a mighty bound.
the lookers-on cheered him, and indeed he well deserve it; but they waited anxiously all the same to see what the bailiff would do.
on he came, taller than andras by several inches, but heavier of build.
he too sprang high and well, but as he came down his heel just grazed the edge of the boat.
dead silence reigned amidst the townsfolk, but andras only laughed and said carelessly: "just a little too short, bailiff; next time you must do better than that."
the bailiff turned red with anger at his rival's scornful words, and answered quickly: "next time you will have something harder to do."
and turning his back on his friends, he went sulkily home.
andras, putting the money he had earned in his pocket, went home also.
the following spring andras happened to be driving his reindeer along a great fiord to the west of vadso.
a boy who had met him hastened to tell the bailiff that his enemy was only a few miles off; and the bailiff, disguising himself as a stalo, or ogre, called his son and his dog and rowed away across the fiord to the place where the boy had met andras.
now the mountaineer was lazily walking along the sands, thinking of the new hut that he was building with the money that he had won on the day of his lucky jump.
he wandered on, his eyes fixed on the sands, so that he did not see the bailiff drive his boat behind a rock, while he changed himself into a heap of wreckage which floated in on the waves.
a stumble over a stone recalled andras to himself, and looking up he beheld the mass of wreckage.
"dear me!
i may find some use for that," he said; and hastened down to the sea, waiting till he could lay hold of some stray rope which might float towards him.
suddenly -- he could not have told why -- a nameless fear seized upon him, and he fled away from the shore as if for his life.
as he ran he heard the sound of a pipe, such as only ogres of the stalo kind were wont to use; and there flashed into his mind what the bailiff had said when they jumped the boat: "next time you will have something harder to do."
so it was no wreckage after all that he had seen, but the bailiff himself.
it happened that in the long summer nights up in the mountain, where the sun never set, and it was very difficult to get to sleep, andras had spent many hours in the study of magic, and this stood him in good stead now.
the instant he heard the stalo music he wished himself to become the feet of a reindeer, and in this guise he galloped like the wind for several miles.
then he stopped to take breath and find out what his enemy was doing.
nothing he could see, but to his ears the notes of a pipe floated over the plain, and ever, as he listened, it drew nearer.
a cold shiver shook andras, and this time he wished himself the feet of a reindeer calf.
for when a reindeer calf has reached the age at which he begins first to lose his hair he is so swift that neither beast nor bird can come near him.
a reindeer calf is the swiftest of all things living.
yes; but not so swift as a stalo, as andras found out when he stopped to rest, and heard the pipe playing!
for a moment his heart sank, and he gave himself up for dead, till he remembered that, not far off, were two little lakes joined together by a short though very broad river.
in the middle of the river lay a stone that was always covered by water, except in dry seasons, and as the winter rains had been very heavy, he felt quite sure that not even the top of it could be seen.
the next minute, if anyone had been looking that way, he would have beheld a small reindeer calf speeding northwards, and by-and-by giving a great spring, which landed him in the midst of the stream.
but, instead of sinking to the bottom, he paused a second to steady himself, then gave a second spring which landed him on the further shore.
he next ran on to a little hill where he saw down and began to neigh loudly, so that the stalo might know exactly where he was.
"ah!
there you are," cried the stalo, appearing on the opposite bank; "for a moment i really thought i had lost you."
"no such luck," answered andras, shaking his head sorrowfully.
by this time he had taken his own shape again.
"well, but i do n't see how i am to get to you," said the stalo, looking up and down.
"jump over, as i did," answered andras; "it is quite easy."
"but i could not jump this river; and i do n't know how you did," replied the stalo."
i should be ashamed to say such things," exclaimed andras.
"do you mean to tell me that a jump, which the weakest lapp boy would make nothing of, is beyond your strength?"
the stalo grew red and angry when he heard these words, just as andras meant him to do.
he bounded into the air and fell straight into the river.
not that that would have mattered, for he was a good swimmer; but andras drew out the bow and arrows which every lapp carries, and took aim at him.
his aim was good, but the stalo sprang so high into the air that the arrow flew between his feet.
a second shot, directed at his forehead, fared no better, for this time the stalo jumped so high to the other side that the arrow passed between his finger and thumb.
then andras aimed his third arrow a little over the stalo's head, and when he sprang up, just an instant too soon, it hit him between the ribs.
mortally wounded as he was, the stalo was not yet dead, and managed to swim to the shore.
stretching himself on the sand, he said slowly to andras: "promise that you will give me an honourable burial, and when my body is laid in the grave go in my boat across the fiord, and take whatever you find in my house which belongs to me.
my dog you must kill, but spare my son, andras."
then he died; and andras sailed in his boat away across the fiord and found the dog and boy.
the dog, a fierce, wicked-looking creature, he slew with one blow from his fist, for it is well known that if a stalo's dog licks the blood that flows from his dead master's wounds the stalo comes to life again.
that is why no real stalo is ever seen without his dog; but the bailiff, being only half a stalo, had forgotten him, when he went to the little lakes in search of andras.
next, andras put all the gold and jewels which he found in the boat into his pockets, and bidding the boy get in, pushed it off from the shore, leaving the little craft to drift as it would, while he himself ran home.
with the treasure he possessed he was able to buy a great herd of reindeer; and he soon married a rich wife, whose parents would not have him as a son-in-law when he was poor, and the two lived happy for ever after.
the white slipper -lsb- from lapplandische mahrchen, j. c. poestion. -rsb-
once upon a time there lived a king who had a daughter just fifteen years old.
and what a daughter!
even the mothers who had daughters of their own could not help allowing that the princess was much more beautiful and graceful than any of them; and, as for the fathers, if one of them ever beheld her by accident he could talk of nothing else for a whole day afterwards.
of course the king, whose name was balancin, was the complete slave of his little girl from the moment he lifted her from the arms of her dead mother; indeed, he did not seem to know that there was anyone else in the world to love.
now diamantina, for that was her name, did not reach her fifteenth birthday without proposals for marriage from every country under heaven; but be the suitor who he might, the king always said him nay.
behind the palace a large garden stretched away to the foot of some hills, and more than one river flowed through.
hither the princess would come each evening towards sunset, attended by her ladies, and gather herself the flowers that were to adorn her rooms.
she also brought with her a pair of scissors to cut off the dead blooms, and a basket to put them in, so that when the sun rose next morning he might see nothing unsightly.
when she had finished this task she would take a walk through the town, so that the poor people might have a chance of speaking with her, and telling her of their troubles; and then she would seek out her father, and together they would consult over the best means of giving help to those who needed it.
but what has all this to do with the white slipper?
my readers will ask.
have patience, and you will see.
next to his daughter, balancin loved hunting, and it was his custom to spend several mornings every week chasing the boars which abounded in the mountains a few miles from the city.
one day, rushing downhill as fast as he could go, he put his foot into a hole and fell, rolling into a rocky pit of brambles.
the king's wounds were not very severe, but his face and hands were cut and torn, while his feet were in a worse plight still, for, instead of proper hunting boots, he only wore sandals, to enable him to run more swiftly.
in a few days the king was as well as ever, and the signs of the scratches were almost gone; but one foot still remained very sore, where a thorn had pierced deeply and had festered.
the best doctors in the kingdom treated it with all their skill; they bathed, and poulticed, and bandaged, but it was in vain.
the foot only grew worse and worse, and became daily more swollen and painful.
after everyone had tried his own particular cure, and found it fail, there came news of a wonderful doctor in some distant land who had healed the most astonishing diseases.
on inquiring, it was found that he never left the walls of his own city, and expected his patients to come to see him; but, by dint of offering a large sum of money, the king persuaded the famous physician to undertake the journey to his own court.
on his arrival the doctor was led at once into the king's presence, and made a careful examination of his foot.
"alas!
your majesty," he said, when he had finished, "the wound is beyond the power of man to heal; but though i can not cure it, i can at least deaden the pain, and enable you to walk without so much suffering."
"oh, if you can only do that," cried the king," i shall be grateful to you for life!
give your own orders; they shall be obeyed."
"then let your majesty bid the royal shoemaker make you a shoe of goat-skin very loose and comfortable, while i prepare a varnish to paint over it of which i alone have the secret!"
so saying, the doctor bowed himself out, leaving the king more cheerful and hopeful than he had been for long.
the days passed very slowly with him during the making of the shoe and the preparation of the varnish, but on the eighth morning the physician appeared, bringing with him the shoe in a case.
he drew it out to slip on the king's foot, and over the goat-skin he had rubbed a polish so white that the snow itself was not more dazzling.
"while you wear this shoe you will not feel the slightest pain," said the doctor.
"for the balsam with which i have rubbed it inside and out has, besides its healing balm, the quality of strengthening the material it touches, so that, even were your majesty to live a thousand years, you would find the slipper just as fresh at the end of that time as it is now."
the king was so eager to put it on that he hardly gave the physician time to finish.
he snatched it from the case and thrust his foot into it, nearly weeping for joy when he found he could walk and run as easily as any beggar boy.
"what can i give you?"
he cried, holding out both hands to the man who had worked this wonder.
"stay with me, and i will heap on you riches greater than ever you dreamed of."
but the doctor said he would accept nothing more than had been agreed on, and must return at once to his own country, where many sick people were awaiting him.
so king balancin had to content himself with ordering the physician to be treated with royal honours, and desiring that an escort should attend him on his journey home.
for two years everything went smoothly at court, and to king balancin and his daughter the sun no sooner rose than it seemed time for it to set.
now, the king's birthday fell in the month of june, and as the weather happened to be unusually fine, he told the princess to celebrate it in any way that pleased her.
diamantina was very fond of being on the river, and she was delighted at this chance of delighting her tastes.
she would have a merry-making such as never had been seen before, and in the evening, when they were tired of sailing and rowing, there should be music and dancing, plays and fireworks.
at the very end, before the people went home, every poor person should be given a loaf of bread and every girl who was to be married within the year a new dress.
the great day appeared to diamantina to be long in coming, but, like other days, it came at last.
before the sun was fairly up in the heavens the princess, too full of excitement to stay in the palace, was walking about the streets so covered with precious stones that you had to shade your eyes before you could look at her.
by-and-by a trumpet sounded, and she hurried home, only to appear again in a few moments walking by the side of her father down to the river.
here a splendid barge was waiting for them, and from it they watched all sorts of races and feats of swimming and diving.
when these were over the barge proceeded up the river to the field where the dancing and concerts were to take place, and after the prizes had been given away to the winners, and the loaves and the dresses had been distributed by the princess, they bade farewell to their guests, and turned to step into the barge which was to carry them back to the palace.
then a dreadful thing happened.
as the king stepped on board the boat one of the sandals of the white slipper, which had got loose, caught in a nail that was sticking out, and caused the king to stumble.
the pain was great, and unconsciously he turned and shook his foot, so that the sandals gave way, and in a moment the precious shoe was in the river.
it had all occurred so quickly that nobody had noticed the loss of the slipper, not even the princess, whom the king's cries speedily brought to his side.
"what is the matter, dear father?"
asked she.
but the king could not tell her; and only managed to gasp out: "my shoe!
my shoe!"
while the sailors stood round staring, thinking that his majesty had suddenly gone mad.
seeing her father's eyes fixed on the stream, diamantina looked hastily in that direction.
there, dancing on the current, was the point of something white, which became more and more distant the longer they watched it.
the king could bear the sight no more, and, besides, now that the healing ointment in the shoe had been removed the pain in his foot was as bad as ever; he gave a sudden cry, staggered, and fell over the bulwarks into the water.
in an instant the river was covered with bobbing heads all swimming their fastest towards the king, who had been carried far down by the swift current.
at length one swimmer, stronger than the rest, seized hold of his tunic, and drew him to the bank, where a thousand eager hands were ready to haul him out.
he was carried, unconscious, to the side of his daughter, who had fainted with terror on seeing her father disappear below the surface, and together they were place in a coach and driven to the palace, where the best doctors in the city were awaiting their arrival.
in a few hours the princess was as well as ever; but the pain, the wetting, and the shock of the accident, all told severely on the king, and for three days he lay in a high fever.
meanwhile, his daughter, herself nearly mad with grief, gave orders that the white slipper should be sought for far and wide; and so it was, but even the cleverest divers could find no trace of it at the bottom of the river.
when it became clear that the slipper must have been carried out to sea by the current, diamantina turned her thoughts elsewhere, and sent messengers in search of the doctor who had brought relief to her father, begging him to make another slipper as fast as possible, to supply the place of the one which was lost.
but the messengers returned with the sad news that the doctor had died some weeks before, and, what was worse, his secret had died with him.
in his weakness this intelligence had such an effect on the king that the physicians feared he would become as ill as before.
he could hardly be persuaded to touch food, and all night long he lay moaning, partly with pain, and partly over his own folly in not having begged the doctor to make him several dozens of white slippers, so that in case of accidents he might always have one to put on.
however, by-and-by he saw that it was no use weeping and wailing, and commanded that they should search for his lost treasure more diligently than ever.
what a sight the river banks presented in those days!
it seemed as if all the people in the country were gathered on them.
but this second search was no more fortunate than the first, and at last the king issued a proclamation that whoever found the missing slipper should be made heir to the crown, and should marry the princess.
now many daughters would have rebelled at being disposed of in the manner; and it must be admitted that diamantina's heart sank when she heard what the king had done.
still, she loved her father so much that she desired his comfort more than anything else in the world, so she said nothing, and only bowed her head.
of course the result of the proclamation was that the river banks became more crowded than before; for all the princess's suitors from distant lands flocked to the spot, each hoping that he might be the lucky finder.
many times a shining stone at the bottom of the stream was taken for the slipper itself, and every evening saw a band of dripping downcast men returning homewards.
but one youth always lingered longer than the rest, and night would still see him engaged in the search, though his clothes stuck to his skin and his teeth chattered.
one day, when the king was lying on his bed racked with pain, he heard the noise of a scuffle going on in his antechamber, and rang a golden bell that stood by his side to summon one of his servants.
"sire," answered the attendant, when the king inquired what was the matter, "the noise you heard was caused by a young man from the town, who has had the impudence to come here to ask if he may measure your majesty's foot, so as to make you another slipper in place of the lost one."
"and what have you done to the youth?"
said the king.
"the servants pushed him out of the palace, and, added a few blows to teach him not to be insolent," replied the man.
"then they did very ill," answered the king, with a frown.
"he came here from kindness, and there was no reason to maltreat him."
"oh, my lord, he had the audacity to wish to touch your majesty's sacred person -- he, a good-for-nothing boy, a mere shoemaker's apprentice, perhaps!
and even if he could make shoes to perfection they would be no use without the soothing balsam."
the king remained silent for a few moments, then he said: "never mind.
go and fetch the youth and bring him to me.
i would gladly try any remedy that may relieve my pain."
so, soon afterwards, the youth, who had not gone far from the palace, was caught and ushered into the king's presence.
he was tall and handsome and, though he professed to make shoes, his manners were good and modest, and he bowed low as he begged the king not only to allow him to take the measure of his foot, but also to suffer him to place a healing plaster over the wound.
balancin was pleased with the young man's voice and appearance, and thought that he looked as if he knew what he was doing.
so he stretched out his bad foot which the youth examined with great attention, and then gently laid on the plaster.
very shortly the ointment began to soothe the sharp pain, and the king, whose confidence increased every moment, begged the young man to tell him his name."
i have no parents; they died when i was six, sire," replied the youth, modestly.
"everyone in the town calls me gilguerillo, because, when i was little, i went singing through the world in spite of my misfortunes.
luckily for me i was born to be happy."
"and you really think you can cure me?"
asked the king.
"completely, my lord," answered gilguerillo.
"and how long do you think it will take?"
"it is not an easy task; but i will try to finish it in a fortnight," replied the youth.
a fortnight seemed to the king a long time to make one slipper.
but he only said: "do you need anything to help you?"
"only a good horse, if your majesty will be kind enough to give me one," answered gilguerillo.
and the reply was so unexpected that the courtiers could hardly restrain their smiles, while the king stared silently.
"you shall have the horse," he said at last, "and i shall expect you back in a fortnight.
if you fulfil your promise you know your reward; if not, i will have you flogged for your impudence."
gilguerillo bowed, and turned to leave the palace, followed by the jeers and scoffs of everyone he met.
but he paid no heed, for he had got what he wanted.
he waited in front of the gates till a magnificent horse was led up to him, and vaulting into the saddle with an ease which rather surprised the attendant, rode quickly out of the town amidst the jests of the assembled crowd, who had heard of his audacious proposal.
and while he is on his way let us pause for a moment and tell who he is.
both father and mother had died before the boy was six years old; and he had lived for many years with his uncle, whose life had been passed in the study of chemistry.
he could leave no money to his nephew, as he had a son of his own; but he taught him all he knew, and at his dead gilguerillo entered an office, where he worked for many hours daily.
in his spare time, instead of playing with the other boys, he passed hours poring over books, and because he was timid and liked to be alone he was held by everyone to be a little mad.
therefore, when it became known that he had promised to cure the king's foot, and had ridden away -- no one knew where -- a roar of laughter and mockery rang through the town, and jeers and scoffing words were sent after him.
but if they had only known what were gilguerillo's thoughts they would have thought him madder than ever.
the real truth was that, on the morning when the princess had walked through the streets before making holiday on the river gilguerillo had seen her from his window, and had straightway fallen in love with her.
of course he felt quite hopeless.
it was absurd to imagine that the apothecary's nephew could ever marry the king's daughter; so he did his best to forget her, and study harder than before, till the royal proclamation suddenly filled him with hope.
when he was free he no longer spent the precious moments poring over books, but, like the rest, he might have been seen wandering along the banks of the river, or diving into the stream after something that lay glistening in the clear water, but which turned out to be a white pebble or a bit of glass.
and at the end he understood that it was not by the river that he would win the princess; and, turning to his books for comfort, he studied harder than ever.
there is an old proverb which says: "everything comes to him who knows how to wait."
it is not all men who know hot to wait, any more than it is all men who can learn by experience; but gilguerillo was one of the few and instead of thinking his life wasted because he could not have the thing he wanted most, he tried to busy himself in other directions.
so, one day, when he expected it least, his reward came to him.
he happened to be reading a book many hundreds of years old, which told of remedies for all kinds of diseases.
most of them, he knew, were merely invented by old women, who sought to prove themselves wiser than other people; but at length he came to something which caused him to sit up straight in his chair, and made his eyes brighten.
this was the description of a balsam -- which would cure every kind of sore or wound -- distilled from a plant only to be found in a country so distant that it would take a man on foot two months to go and come back again.
when i say that the book declared that the balsam could heal every sort of sore or wound, there were a few against which it was powerless, and it gave certain signs by which these might be known.
this was the reason why gilguerillo demanded to see the king's foot before he would undertake to cure it; and to obtain admittance he gave out that he was a shoemaker.
however, the dreaded signs were absent, and his heart bounded at the thought that the princess was within his reach.
perhaps she was; but a great deal had to be accomplished yet, and he had allowed himself a very short time in which to do it.
he spared his horse only so much as was needful, yet it took him six days to reach the spot where the plant grew.
a thick wood lay in front of him, and, fastening the bridle tightly to a tree, he flung himself on his hands and knees and began to hunt for the treasure.
many time he fancied it was close to him, and many times it turned out to be something else; but, at last, when light was fading, and he had almost given up hope, he came upon a large bed of the plant, right under his feet!
trembling with joy, he picked every scrap he could see, and placed it in his wallet.
then, mounting his horse, he galloped quickly back towards the city.
it was night when he entered the gates, and the fifteen days allotted were not up till the next day.
his eyes were heavy with sleep, and his body ached with the long strain, but, without pausing to rest, he kindled a fire on is hearth, and quickly filling a pot with water, threw in the herbs and left them to boil.
after that he lay down and slept soundly.
the sun was shining when he awoke, and he jumped up and ran to the pot.
the plant had disappeared and in its stead was a thick syrup, just as the book had said there would be.
he lifted the syrup out with a spoon, and after spreading it in the sun till it was partly dry, poured it into a small flask of crystal.
he next washed himself thoroughly, and dressed himself, in his best clothes, and putting the flask in his pocket, set out for the palace, and begged to see the king without delay.
now balancin, whose foot had been much less painful since gilguerillo had wrapped it in the plaster, was counting the days to the young man's return; and when he was told gilguerillo was there, ordered him to be admitted at once.
as he entered, the king raised himself eagerly on his pillows, but his face fell when he saw no signs of a slipper.
"you have failed, then?"
he said, throwing up his hands in despair."
i hope not, your majesty; i think not," answered the youth.
and drawing the flask from his pocket, he poured two or three drops on the wound.
"repeat this for three nights, and you will find yourself cured," said he.
and before the king had time to thank him he had bowed himself out.
of course the news soon spread through the city, and men and women never tired of calling gilguerillo an impostor, and prophesying that the end of the three days would see him in prison, if not on the scaffold.
but gilguerillo paid no heed to their hard words, and no more did the king, who took care that no hand but his own should put on the healing balsam.
on the fourth morning the king awoke and instantly stretched out his wounded foot that he might prove the truth or falsehood of gilguerillo's remedy.
the wound was certainly cured on that side, but how about the other?
yes, that was cured also; and not even a scar was left to show where it had been!
was ever any king so happy as balancin when he satisfied himself of this?
lightly as a deer he jumped from his bed, and began to turn head over heels and to perform all sorts of antics, so as to make sure that his foot was in truth as well as it looked.
and when he was quite tired he sent for his daughter, and bade the courtiers bring the lucky young man to his room.
"he is really young and handsome," said the princess to herself, heaving a sigh of relief that it was not some dreadful old man who had healed her father; and while the king was announcing to his courtiers the wonderful cure that had been made, diamantina was thinking that if gilguerillo looked so well in his common dress, how much improved by the splendid garments of a king" son.
however, she held her peace, and only watched with amusement when the courtiers, knowing there was no help for it, did homage and obeisance to the chemist's boy.
then they brought to gilguerillo a magnificent tunic of green velvet bordered with gold, and a cap with three white plumes stuck in it; and at the sight of him so arrayed, the princess fell in love with him in a moment.
the wedding was fixed to take place in eight days, and at the ball afterwards nobody danced so long or so lightly as king balancin.
the magic book -lsb- from capullos de rosa, por d. enrique ceballos quintana. -rsb-
-lsb- from aeventyr fra zylland samlede og optegnede af tang kristensen.
translated from the danish by mrs. skavgaard-pedersen. -rsb-
there was once an old couple named peder and kirsten who had an only son called hans.
from the time he was a little boy he had been told that on his sixteenth birthday he must go out into the world and serve his apprenticeship.
so, one fine summer morning, he started off to seek his fortune with nothing but the clothes he wore on his back.
for many hours he trudged on merrily, now and then stopping to drink from some clear spring or to pick some ripe fruit from a tree.
the little wild creatures peeped at him from beneath the bushes, and he nodded and smiled, and wished them "good-morning."
after he had been walking for some time he met an old white-bearded man who was coming along the footpath.
the boy would not step aside, and the man was determined not to do so either, so they ran against one another with a bump.
"it seems to me," said the old fellow, "that a boy should give way to an old man."
"the path is for me as well as for you," answered young hans saucily, for he had never been taught politeness.
"well, that's true enough," answered the other mildly.
"and where are you going?'"
i am going into service," said hans.
"then you can come and serve me," replied the man.
well, hans could do that; but what would his wages be?
"two pounds a year, and nothing to do but keep some rooms clean," said the new-comer.
this seemed to hans to be easy enough; so he agreed to enter the old man's service, and they set out together.
on their way they crossed a deep valley and came to a mountain, where the man opened a trapdoor, and bidding hans follow him, he crept in and began to go down a long flight of steps.
when they got to the bottom hans saw a large number of rooms lit by many lamps and full of beautiful things.
while he was looking round the old man said to him: "now you know what you have to do.
you must keep these rooms clean, and strew sand on the floor every day.
here is a table where you will always find food and drink, and there is your bed.
you see there are a great many suits of clothes hanging on the wall, and you may wear any you please; but remember that you are never to open this locked door.
if you do ill will befall you.
farewell, for i am going away again and can not tell when i may return.
no sooner had the old man disappeared than hans sat down to a good meal, and after that went to bed and slept until the morning.
at first he could not remember what had happened to him, but by-and-by he jumped up and went into all the rooms, which he examined carefully.
"how foolish to bid me to put sand on the floors," he thought, "when there is nobody here by myself!
i shall do nothing of the sort."
and so he shut the doors quickly, and only cleaned and set in order his own room.
and after the first few days he felt that that was unnecessary too, because no one came there to see if the rooms where clean or not.
at last he did no work at all, but just sat and wondered what was behind the locked door, till he determined to go and look for himself.
the key turned easily in the lock.
hans entered, half frightened at what he was doing, and the first thing he beheld was a heap of bones.
that was not very cheerful; and he was just going out again when his eye fell on a shelf of books.
here was a good way of passing the time, he thought, for he was fond of reading, and he took one of the books from the shelf.
it was all about magic, and told you how you could change yourself into anything in the world you liked.
could anything be more exciting or more useful?
so he put it in his pocket, and ran quickly away out of the mountain by a little door which had been left open.
when he got home his parents asked him what he had been doing and where he had got the fine clothes he wore.
"oh, i earned them myself," answered he.
"you never earned them in this short time," said his father.
"be off with you; i wo n't keep you here.
i will have no thieves in my house!"
"well i only came to help you," replied the boy sulkily.
"now i'll be off, as you wish; but to-morrow morning when you rise you will see a great dog at the door.
do not drive it away, but take it to the castle and sell it to the duke, and they will give you ten dollars for it; only you must bring the strap you lead it with, back to the house."
sure enough the next day the dog was standing at the door waiting to be let in.
the old man was rather afraid of getting into trouble, but his wife urged him to sell the dog as the boy had bidden him, so he took it up to the castle and sold it to the duke for ten dollars.
but he did not forget to take off the strap with which he had led the animal, and to carry it home.
when he got there old kirsten met him at the door.
"well, peder, and have you sold the dog?"
asked she.
"yes, kirsten; and i have brought back ten dollars, as the boy told us," answered peder.
"ay!
but that's fine!"
said his wife.
"now you see what one gets by doing as one is bid; if it had not been for me you would have driven the dog away again, and we should have lost the money.
after all, i always know what is best."
"nonsense!"
said her husband; "women always think they know best.
i should have sold the dog just the same whatever you had told me.
put the money away in a safe place, and do n't talk so much."
the next day hans came again; but though everything had turned out as he had foretold, he found that his father was still not quite satisfied.
"be off with you!"
said he, "you'll get us into trouble.'"
i have n't helped you enough yet," replied the boy.
"to-morrow there will come a great fat cow, as big as the house.
take it to the king's palace and you'll get as much as a thousand dollars for it.
only you must unfasten the halter you lead it with and bring it back, and do n't return by the high road, but through the forest."
the next day, when the couple rose, they saw an enormous head looking in at their bedroom window, and behind it was a cow which was nearly as big as their hut.
kirsten was wild with joy to think of the money the cow would bring them.
"but how are you going to put the rope over her head?"
asked she.
"wait and you'll see, mother," answered her husband.
then peder took the ladder that led up to the hayloft and set it against the cow's neck, and he climbed up and slipped the rope over her head.
when he had made sure that the noose was fast they started for the palace, and met the king himself walking in his grounds."
i heard that the princess was going to be married," said peder, "so i've brought your majesty a cow which is bigger than any cow that was ever seen.
will your majesty deign to buy it?"
the king had, in truth, never seen so large a beast, and he willingly paid the thousand dollars, which was the price demanded; but peder remembered to take off the halter before he left.
after he was gone the king sent for the butcher and told him to kill the animal for the wedding feast.
the butcher got ready his pole-axe; but just as he was going to strike, the cow changed itself into a dove and flew away, and the butcher stood staring after it as if he were turned to stone.
however, as the dove could not be found, he was obliged to tell the king what had happened, and the king in his turn despatched messengers to capture the old man and bring him back.
but peder was safe in the woods, and could not be found.
when at last he felt the danger was over, and he might go home, kirsten nearly fainted with joy at the sight of all the money he brought with him.
"now that we are rich people we must build a bigger house," cried she; and was vexed to find that peder only shook his head and said: "no; if they did that people would talk, and say they had got their wealth by ill-doing."
a few mornings later hans came again.
"be off before you get us into trouble," said his father.
"so far the money has come right enough, but i do n't trust it."
"do n't worry over that, father," said hans.
"to-morrow you will find a horse outside by the gate.
ride it to market and you will get a thousand dollars for it.
only do n't forget to loosen the bridle when you sell it."
well, in the morning there was the horse; kirsten had never seen so find an animal.
"take care it does n't hurt you, peder," said she.
"nonsense, wife," answered he crossly.
"when i was a lad i lived with horses, and could ride anything for twenty miles round."
but that was not quite the truth, for he had never mounted a horse in his life.
still, the animal was quiet enough, so peder got safely to market on its back.
there he met a man who offered nine hundred and ninety-nine dollars for it, but peder would take nothing less than a thousand.
at last there came an old, grey-bearded man who looked at the horse and agreed to buy it; but the moment he touched it the horse began to kick and plunge."
i must take the bridle off," said peder.
"it is not to be sold with the animal as is usually the case."
"i'll give you a hundred dollars for the bridle," said the old man, taking out his purse.
"no, i ca n't sell it," replied hans's father.
"five hundred dollars!"
"no.'"
a thousand!"
at this splendid offer peder's prudence gave way; it was a shame to let so much money go.
so he agreed to accept it.
but he could hardly hold the horse, it became so unmanageable.
so he gave the animal in charge to the old man, and went home with his two thousand dollars.
kirsten, of course, was delighted at this new piece of good fortune, and insisted that the new house should be built and land bought.
this time peder consented, and soon they had quite a fine farm.
meanwhile the old man rode off on his new purchase, and when he came to a smithy he asked the smith to forge shoes for the horse.
the smith proposed that they should first have a drink together, and the horse was tied up by the spring whilst they went indoors.
the day was hot, and both men were thirsty, and, besides, they had much to say; and so the hours slipped by and found them still talking.
then the servant girl came out to fetch a pail of water, and, being a kind-hearted lass, she gave some to the horse to drink.
what was her surprise when the animal said to her: "take off my bridle and you will save my life.'"
i dare not," said she; "your master will be so angry."
"he can not hurt you," answered the horse, "and you will save my life."
at that she took off the bridle; but nearly fainted with astonishment when the horse turned into a dove and flew away just as the old man came out of the house.
directly he saw what had happened he changed himself into a hawk and flew after the dove.
over the woods and fields they went, and at length they reached a king's palace surrounded by beautiful gardens.
the princess was walking with her attendants in the rose garden when the dove turned itself into a gold ring and fell at her feet.
"why, here is a ring!"
she cried, "where could it have come from?"
and picking it up she put it on her finger.
as she did so the hill-man lost his power over hans -- for of course you understand that it was he who had been the dog, the cow, the horse and the dove.
"well, that is really strange," said the princess.
"it fits me as though it had been made for me!"
just at that moment up came the king.
"look at what i have found!"
cried his daughter.
"well, that is not worth much, my dear," said he.
"besides, you have rings enough, i should think."
"never mind, i like it," replied the princess.
but as soon as she was alone, to her amazement, the ring suddenly left her finger and became a man.
you can imagine how frightened she was, as, indeed, anybody would have been; but in an instant the man became a ring again, and then turned back to a man, and so it went on for some time until she began to get used to these sudden changes."
i am sorry i frightened you," said hans, when he thought he could safely speak to the princess without making her scream."
i took refuge with you because the old hill-man, whom i have offended, was trying to kill me, and here i am safe."
"you had better stay here then," said the princess.
so hans stayed, and he and she became good friends; though, of course, he only became a man when no one else was present.
this was all very well; but, one day, as they were talking together, the king happened to enter the room, and although hans quickly changed himself into a ring again it was too late.
the king was terribly angry.
"so this is why you have refused to marry all the kings and princes who have sought your hand?"
he cried.
and, without waiting for her to speak, he commanded that his daughter should be walled up in the summer-house and starved to death with her lover.
that evening the poor princess, still wearing her ring, was put into the summer-house with enough food to last for three days, and the door was bricked up.
but at the end of a week or two the king thought it was time to give her a grand funeral, in spite of her bad behaviour, and he had the summer-house opened.
he could hardly believe his eyes when he found that the princess was not there, nor hans either.
instead, there lay at his feet a large hole, big enough for two people to pass through.
now what had happened was this.
when the princess and hans had given up hope, and cast themselves down on the ground to die, they fell down this hole, and right through the earth as well, and at last they tumbled into a castle built of pure gold at the other side of the world, and there they lived happily.
but of this, of course, the king knew nothing.
"will anyone go down and see where the passage leads to?"
he asked, turning to his guards and courtiers."
i will reward splendidly the man who is brave enough to explore it."
for a long time nobody answered.
the hole was dark and deep, and if it had a bottom no one could see it.
at length a soldier, who was a careless sort of fellow, offered himself for the service, and cautiously lowered himself into the darkness.
but in a moment he, too, fell down, down, down.
was he going to fall for ever, he wondered!
oh, how thankful he was in the end to reach the castle, and to meet the princess and hans, looking quite well and not at all as if they had been starved.
they began to talk, and the soldier told them that the king was very sorry for the way he had treated his daughter, and wished day and night that he could have her back again.
then they all took ship and sailed home, and when they came to the princess's country, hans disguised himself as the sovereign of a neighbouring kingdom, and went up to the palace alone.
he was given a hearty welcome by the king, who prided himself on his hospitality, and a banquet was commanded in his honour.
that evening, whilst they sat drinking their wine, hans said to the king: "i have heard the fame of your majesty's wisdom, and i have travelled from far to ask your counsel.
a man in my country has buried his daughter alive because she loved a youth who was born a peasant.
how shall i punish this unnatural father, for it is left to me to give judgment?"
the king, who was still truly grieved for his daughter's loss, answered quickly: "burn him alive, and strew his ashes all over the kingdom."
hans looked at him steadily for a moment, and then threw off his disguise.
"you are the man," said he; "and i am he who loved your daughter, and became a gold ring on her finger.
she is safe, and waiting not far from here; but you have pronounced judgment on yourself."
then the king fell on his knees and begged for mercy; and as he had in other respects been a good father, they forgave him.
the wedding of hans and the princess was celebrated with great festivities which lasted a month.
as for the hill-man he intended to be present; but whilst he was walking along a street which led to the palace a loose stone fell on his head and killed him.
_book_title_: andrew_lang___the_pink_fairy_book.txt.out
the cat's elopement -lsb- from the japanische marchen und sagen, von david brauns -lrb- leipzig: wilhelm friedrich -rrb-. -rsb-
once upon a time there lived a cat of marvellous beauty, with a skin as soft and shining as silk, and wise green eyes, that could see even in the dark.
his name was gon, and he belonged to a music teacher, who was so fond and proud of him that he would not have parted with him for anything in the world.
now not far from the music master's house there dwelt a lady who possessed a most lovely little pussy cat called koma.
she was such a little dear altogether, and blinked her eyes so daintily, and ate her supper so tidily, and when she had finished she licked her pink nose so delicately with her little tongue, that her mistress was never tired of saying, "koma, koma, what should i do without you?"
well, it happened one day that these two, when out for an evening stroll, met under a cherry tree, and in one moment fell madly in love with each other.
gon had long felt that it was time for him to find a wife, for all the ladies in the neighbourhood paid him so much attention that it made him quite shy; but he was not easy to please, and did not care about any of them.
now, before he had time to think, cupid had entangled him in his net, and he was filled with love towards koma.
she fully returned his passion, but, like a woman, she saw the difficulties in the way, and consulted sadly with gon as to the means of overcoming them.
gon entreated his master to set matters right by buying koma, but her mistress would not part from her.
then the music master was asked to sell gon to the lady, but he declined to listen to any such suggestion, so everything remained as before.
at length the love of the couple grew to such a pitch that they determined to please themselves, and to seek their fortunes together.
so one moonlight night they stole away, and ventured out into an unknown world.
all day long they marched bravely on through the sunshine, till they had left their homes far behind them, and towards evening they found themselves in a large park.
the wanderers by this time were very hot and tired, and the grass looked very soft and inviting, and the trees cast cool deep shadows, when suddenly an ogre appeared in this paradise, in the shape of a big, big dog!
he came springing towards them showing all his teeth, and koma shrieked, and rushed up a cherry tree.
gon, however, stood his ground boldly, and prepared to give battle, for he felt that koma's eyes were upon him, and that he must not run away.
but, alas!
his courage would have availed him nothing had his enemy once touched him, for he was large and powerful, and very fierce.
from her perch in the tree koma saw it all, and screamed with all her might, hoping that some one would hear, and come to help.
luckily a servant of the princess to whom the park belonged was walking by, and he drove off the dog, and picking up the trembling gon in his arms, carried him to his mistress.
so poor little koma was left alone, while gon was borne away full of trouble, not in the least knowing what to do.
even the attention paid him by the princess, who was delighted with his beauty and pretty ways, did not console him, but there was no use in fighting against fate, and he could only wait and see what would turn up.
the princess, gon's new mistress, was so good and kind that everybody loved her, and she would have led a happy life, had it not been for a serpent who had fallen in love with her, and was constantly annoying her by his presence.
her servants had orders to drive him away as often as he appeared; but as they were careless, and the serpent very sly, it sometimes happened that he was able to slip past them, and to frighten the princess by appearing before her.
one day she was seated in her room, playing on her favourite musical instrument, when she felt something gliding up her sash, and saw her enemy making his way to kiss her cheek.
she shrieked and threw herself backwards, and gon, who had been curled up on a stool at her feet, understood her terror, and with one bound seized the snake by his neck.
he gave him one bite and one shake, and flung him on the ground, where he lay, never to worry the princess any more.
then she took gon in her arms, and praised and caressed him, and saw that he had the nicest bits to eat, and the softest mats to lie on; and he would have had nothing in the world to wish for if only he could have seen koma again.
time passed on, and one morning gon lay before the house door, basking in the sun.
he looked lazily at the world stretched out before him, and saw in the distance a big ruffian of a cat teasing and ill-treating quite a little one.
he jumped up, full of rage, and chased away the big cat, and then he turned to comfort the little one, when his heart nearly burst with joy to find that it was koma.
at first koma did not know him again, he had grown so large and stately; but when it dawned upon her who it was, her happiness knew no bounds.
and they rubbed their heads and their noses again and again, while their purring might have been heard a mile off.
paw in paw they appeared before the princess, and told her the story of their life and its sorrows.
the princess wept for sympathy, and promised that they should never more be parted, but should live with her to the end of their days.
by-and-bye the princess herself got married, and brought a prince to dwell in the palace in the park.
and she told him all about her two cats, and how brave gon had been, and how he had delivered her from her enemy the serpent.
and when the prince heard, he swore they should never leave them, but should go with the princess wherever she went.
so it all fell out as the princess wished; and gon and koma had many children, and so had the princess, and they all played together, and were friends to the end of their lives.
how the dragon was tricked from griechtsche und albanesische marchen, von j. g. von hahn.
-lrb- leipzig: engelmann.
1864. -rrb-
once upon a time there lived a man who had two sons but they did not get on at all well together, for the younger was much handsomer than his elder brother who was very jealous of him.
when they grew older, things became worse and worse, and at last one day as they were walking through a wood the elder youth seized hold of the other, tied him to a tree, and went on his way hoping that the boy might starve to death.
however, it happened that an old and humpbacked shepherd passed the tree with his flock, and seeing the prisoner, he stopped and said to him, "tell me, my son why are you tied to that tree?"
"because i was so crooked," answered the young man; "but it has quite cured me, and now my back is as straight as can be.'"
i wish you would bind me to a tree," exclaimed the shepherd, "so that my back would get straight."
"with all the pleasure in life," replied the youth.
"if you will loosen these cords i will tie you up with them as firmly as i can."
this was soon done, and then the young man drove off the sheep, leaving their real shepherd to repent of his folly; and before he had gone very far he met with a horse boy and a driver of oxen, and he persuaded them to turn with him and to seek for adventures.
by these and many other tricks he soon became so celebrated that his fame reached the king's ears, and his majesty was filled with curiosity to see the man who had managed to outwit everybody.
so he commanded his guards to capture the young man and bring him before him.
and when the young man stood before the king, the king spoke to him and said, "by your tricks and the pranks that you have played on other people, you have, in the eye of the law, forfeited your life.
but on one condition i will spare you, and that is, if you will bring me the flying horse that belongs to the great dragon.
fail in this, and you shall be hewn in a thousand pieces."
"if that is all," said the youth, "you shall soon have it."
so he went out and made his way straight to the stable where the flying horse was tethered.
he stretched his hand cautiously out to seize the bridle, when the horse suddenly began to neigh as loud as he could.
now the room in which the dragon slept was just above the stable, and at the sound of the neighing he woke and cried to the horse, "what is the matter, my treasure?
is anything hurting you?"
after waiting a little while the young man tried again to loose the horse, but a second time it neighed so loudly that the dragon woke up in a hurry and called out to know why the horse was making such a noise.
but when the same thing happened the third time, the dragon lost his temper, and went down into the stable and took a whip and gave the horse a good beating.
this offended the horse and made him angry, and when the young man stretched out his hand to untie his head, he made no further fuss, but suffered himself to be led quietly away.
once clear of the stable the young man sprang on his back and galloped off, calling over his shoulder, "hi!
dragon!
dragon!
if anyone asks you what has become of your horse, you can say that i have got him!"
but the king said, "the flying horse is all very well, but i want something more.
you must bring me the covering with the little bells that lies on the bed of the dragon, or i will have you hewn into a thousand pieces."
"is that all?"
answered the youth.
"that is easily done."
and when night came he went away to the dragon's house and climbed up on to the roof.
then he opened a little window in the roof and let down the chain from which the kettle usually hung, and tried to hook the bed covering and to draw it up.
but the little bells all began to ring, and the dragon woke and said to his wife, "wife, you have pulled off all the bed-clothes!"
and drew the covering towards him, pulling, as he did so, the young man into the room.
then the dragon flung himself on the youth and bound him fast with cords saying as he tied the last knot, "to-morrow when i go to church you must stay at home and kill him and cook him, and when i get back we will eat him together."
so the following morning the dragoness took hold of the young man and reached down from the shelf a sharp knife with which to kill him.
but as she untied the cords the better to get hold of him, the prisoner caught her by the legs, threw her to the ground, seized her and speedily cut her throat, just as she had been about to do for him, and put her body in the oven.
then he snatched up the covering and carried it to the king.
the king was seated on his throne when the youth appeared before him and spread out the covering with a deep bow.
"that is not enough," said his majesty; "you must bring me the dragon himself, or i will have you hewn into a thousand pieces."
"it shall be done," answered the youth; "but you must give me two years to manage it, for my beard must grow so that he may not know me."
"so be it," said the king.
and the first thing the young man did when his beard was grown was to take the road to the dragon's house and on the way he met a beggar, whom he persuaded to change clothes with him, and in the beggar's garments he went fearlessly forth to the dragon.
he found his enemy before his house, very busy making a box, and addressed him politely, "good morning, your worship.
have you a morsel of bread?"
"you must wait," replied the dragon,'till i have finished my box, and then i will see if i can find one."
"what will you do with the box when it is made?"
inquired the beggar.
"it is for the young man who killed my wife, and stole my flying horse and my bed covering," said the dragon.
"he deserves nothing better," answered the beggar, "for it was an ill deed.
still that box is too small for him, for he is a big man."
"you are wrong," said the dragon.
"the box is large enough even for me."
"well, the rogue is nearly as tall as you," replied the beggar, "and, of course, if you can get in, he can.
but i am sure you would find it a tight fit."
"no, there is plenty of room," said the dragon, tucking himself carefully inside.
but no sooner was he well in, than the young man clapped on the lid and called out, "now press hard, just to see if he will be able to get out."
the dragon pressed as hard as he could, but the lid never moved.
"it is all right," he cried; "now you can open it."
but instead of opening it, the young man drove in long nails to make it tighter still; then he took the box on his back and brought it to the king.
and when the king heard that the dragon was inside, he was so excited that he would not wait one moment, but broke the lock and lifted the lid just a little way to make sure he was really there.
he was very careful not to leave enough space for the dragon to jump out, but unluckily there was just room for his great mouth, and with one snap the king vanished down his wide red jaws.
then the young man married the king's daughter and ruled over the land, but what he did with the dragon nobody knows.
the goblin and the grocer translated from the german of hans andersen.
there was once a hard-working student who lived in an attic, and he had nothing in the world of his own.
there was also a hard-working grocer who lived on the first floor, and he had the whole house for his own.
the goblin belonged to him, for every christmas eve there was waiting for him at the grocer's a dish of jam with a large lump of butter in the middle.
the grocer could afford this, so the goblin stayed in the grocer's shop; and this teaches us a good deal.
one evening the student came in by the back door to buy a candle and some cheese; he had no one to send, so he came himself.
he got what he wanted, paid for it, and nodded a good evening to the grocer and his wife -lrb- she was a woman who could do more than nod; she could talk -rrb-.
when the student had said good night he suddenly stood still, reading the sheet of paper in which the cheese had been wrapped.
it was a leaf torn out of an old book -- a book of poetry "there's more of that over there!"
said the grocer" i gave an old woman some coffee for the book.
if you like to give me twopence you can have the rest."
"yes," said the student, "give me the book instead of the cheese.
i can eat my bread without cheese.
it would be a shame to leave the book to be torn up.
you are a clever and practical man, but about poetry you understand as much as that old tub over there!"
and that sounded rude as far as the tub was concerned, but the grocer laughed, and so did the student.
it was only said in fun.
but the goblin was angry that anyone should dare to say such a thing to a grocer who owned the house and sold the best butter.
when it was night and the shop was shut, and everyone was in bed except the student, the goblin went upstairs and took the grocer's wife's tongue.
she did not use it when she was asleep, and on whatever object in the room he put it that thing began to speak, and spoke out its thoughts and feelings just as well as the lady to whom it belonged.
but only one thing at a time could use it, and that was a good thing, or they would have all spoken together.
the goblin laid the tongue on the tub in which were the old newspapers.
"is it true," he asked," that you know nothing about poetry?"
"certainly not!"
answered the tub.
"poetry is something that is in the papers, and that is frequently cut out.
i have a great deal more in me than the student has, and yet i am only a small tub in the grocer's shop."
and the goblin put the tongue on the coffee-mill, and how it began to grind!
he put it on the butter-cask, and on the till, and all were of the same opinion as the waste-paper tub.
and one must believe the majority.
"now i will tell the student!"
and with these words he crept softly up the stairs to the attic where the student lived.
there was a light burning, and the goblin peeped through the key-hole and saw that he was reading the torn book that he had bought in the shop.
but how bright it was!
out of the book shot a streak of light which grew into a large tree and spread its branches far above the student.
every leaf was alive, and every flower was a beautiful girl's head, some with dark and shining eyes, others with wonderful blue ones.
every fruit was a glittering star, and there was a marvellous music in the student's room.
the little goblin had never even dreamt of such a splendid sight, much less seen it.
he stood on tiptoe gazing and gazing, till the candle in the attic was put out; the student had blown it out and had gone to bed, but the goblin remained standing outside listening to the music, which very softly and sweetly was now singing the student a lullaby."
i have never seen anything like this!"
said the goblin."
i never expected this!
i must stay with the student."
the little fellow thought it over, for he was a sensible goblin.
then he sighed, "the student has no jam!"
and on that he went down to the grocer again.
and it was a good thing that he did go back, for the tub had nearly worn out the tongue.
it had read everything that was inside it, on the one side, and was just going to turn itself round and read from the other side when the goblin came in and returned the tongue to its owner.
but the whole shop, from the till down to the shavings, from that night changed their opinion of the tub, and they looked up to it, and had such faith in it that they were under the impression that when the grocer read the art and drama critiques out of the paper in the evenings, it all came from the tub.
but the goblin could no longer sit quietly listening to the wisdom and intellect downstairs.
no, as soon as the light shone in the evening from the attic it seemed to him as though its beams were strong ropes dragging him up, and he had to go and peep through the key-hole.
there he felt the sort of feeling we have looking at the great rolling sea in a storm, and he burst into tears.
he could not himself say why he wept, but in spite of his tears he felt quite happy.
how beautiful it must be to sit under that tree with the student, but that he could not do; he had to content himself with the key-hole and be happy there!
there he stood out on the cold landing, the autumn wind blowing through the cracks of the floor.
it was cold -- very cold, but he first found it out when the light in the attic was put out and the music in the wood died away.
ah!
then it froze him, and he crept down again into his warm corner; there it was comfortable and cosy.
when christmas came, and with it the jam with the large lump of butter, ah!
then the grocer was first with him.
but in the middle of the night the goblin awoke, hearing a great noise and knocking against the shutters -- people hammering from outside.
the watchman was blowing his horn: a great fire had broken out; the whole town was in flames.
was it in the house?
or was it at a neighbour's?
where was it?
the alarm increased.
the grocer's wife was so terrified that she took her gold earrings out of her ears and put them in her pocket in order to save something.
the grocer seized his account books.
and the maid her black silk dress.
everyone wanted to save his most valuable possession; so did the goblin, and in a few leaps he was up the stairs and in the student's room.
he was standing quietly by the open window looking at the fire that was burning in the neighbour's house just opposite.
the goblin seized the book lying on the table, put it in his red cap, and clasped it with both hands.
the best treasure in the house was saved, and he climbed out on to the roof with it -- on to the chimney.
there he sat, lighted up by the flames from the burning house opposite, both hands holding tightly on his red cap, in which lay the treasure; and now he knew what his heart really valued most -- to whom he really belonged.
but when the fire was put out, and the goblin thought it over -- then --" i will divide myself between the two," he said."
i can not quite give up the grocer, because of the jam!"
and it is just the same with us.
we also can not quite give up the grocer -- because of the jam.
the house in the wood from the german of grimm.
a poor woodcutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little hut on the borders of a great forest.
one morning as he was going to his work, he said to his wife, "let our eldest daughter bring me my lunch into the wood; and so that she shall not lose her way, i will take a bag of millet with me, and sprinkle the seed on the path."
when the sun had risen high over the forest, the girl set out with a basin of soup.
but the field and wood sparrows, the larks and finches, blackbirds and green finches had picked up the millet long ago, and the girl could not find her way.
she went on and on, till the sun set and night came on.
the trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and she began to be very much frightened.
then she saw in tile distance a light that twinkled between the trees.
"there must be people living yonder," she thought, "who will take me in for the night," and she began walking towards it.
not long afterwards she came to a house with lights in the windows.
she knocked at the door, and a gruff voice called, "come in!"
the girl stepped into the dark entrance, and tapped at the door of the room.
"just walk in," cried the voice, and when she opened the door there sat an old gray-haired man at the table.
his face was resting on his hands, and his white beard flowed over the table almost down to the ground.
by the stove lay three beasts, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow.
the girl told the old man her story, and asked for a night's lodging.
the man said: pretty cock, pretty hen, and you, pretty brindled cow, what do you say now?
"duks," answered the beasts; and that must have meant, "we are quite willing," for the old man went on, "here is abundance; go into the back kitchen and cook us a supper."
the girl found plenty of everything in the kitchen, and cooked a good meal, but she did not think of the beasts.
she placed the full dishes on the table, sat down opposite the gray-haired man, and ate till her hunger was appeased.
when she was satisfied, she said, "but now i am so tired, where is a bed in which i can sleep?"
the beasts answered: you have eaten with him, you have drunk with him, of us you have not thought, sleep then as you ought!
then the old man said, "go upstairs, and there you will find a bedroom; shake the bed, and put clean sheets on, and go to sleep."
the maiden went upstairs, and when she had made the bed, she lay down.
after some time the gray-haired man came, looked at her by the light of his candle, and shook his head.
and when he saw that she was sound asleep, he opened a trapdoor and let her fall into the cellar.
the woodcutter came home late in the evening, and reproached his wife for leaving him all day without food.
"no, i did not," she answered; "the girl went off with your dinner.
she must have lost her way, but will no doubt come back to-morrow."
but at daybreak the woodcutter started off into the wood, and this time asked his second daughter to bring his food."
i will take a bag of lentils," said he; "they are larger than millet, and the girl will see them better and be sure to find her way."
at midday the maiden took the food, but the lentils had all gone; as on the previous day, the wood birds had eaten them all.
the maiden wandered about the wood till nightfall, when she came in the same way to the old man's house, and asked for food and a night's lodging.
the man with the white hair again asked the beasts: pretty cock, pretty hen, and you, pretty brindled cow, what do you say now?
the beasts answered, "duks," and everything happened as on the former day.
the girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank with the old man, and did not trouble herself about the animals.
and when she asked for a bed, they replied: you have eaten with him you have drunk with him, of us you have not thought, now sleep as you ought!
and when she was asleep, the old man shook his head over her, and let her fall into the cellar.
on the third morning the woodcutter said to his wife, "send our youngest child to-day with my dinner.
she is always good and obedient, and will keep to the right path, and not wander away like her sisters, idle drones!"
but the mother said, "must i lose my dearest child too?"
"do not fear," he answered; "she is too clever and intelligent to lose her way.
i will take plenty of peas with me and strew them along; they are even larger than lentils, and will show her the way."
but when the maiden started off with the basket on her arm, the wood pigeons had eaten up the peas, and she did not know which way to go.
she was much distressed, and thought constantly of her poor hungry father and her anxious mother.
at last, when it grew dark, she saw the little light, and came to the house in the wood.
she asked prettily if she might stay there for the night, and the man with the white beard asked his beasts again: pretty cock, pretty hen, and you, pretty brindled cow, what do you say now?
"duks," they said.
then the maiden stepped up to the stove where the animals were lying, and stroked the cock and the hen, and scratched the brindled cow between its horns.
and when at the bidding of the old man she had prepared a good supper, and the dishes were standing on the table, she said, "shall i have plenty while the good beasts have nothing?
there is food to spare outside; i will attend to them first."
then she went out and fetched barley and strewed it before the cock and hen, and brought the cow an armful of sweet-smelling hay.
"eat that, dear beasts," she said," and when you are thirsty you shall have a good drink."
then she fetched a bowl of water, and the cock and hen flew on to the edge, put their beaks in, and then held up their heads as birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow also drank her fill.
when the beasts were satisfied, the maiden sat down beside the old man at the table and ate what was left for her.
soon the cock and hen began to tuck their heads under their wings, and the brindled cow blinked its eyes, so the maiden said, "shall we not go to rest now?"
pretty cock, pretty hen, and you, pretty brindled cow, what do you say now?
the animals said, "duks: you have eaten with us, you have drunk with us, you have tended us right, so we wish you good night."
the maiden therefore went upstairs, made the bed and put on clean sheets and fell asleep.
she slept peacefully till midnight, when there was such a noise in the house that she awoke.
everything trembled and shook; the animals sprang up and dashed themselves in terror against the wall; the beams swayed as if they would be torn from their foundations, it seemed as if the stairs were tumbling down, and then the roof fell in with a crash.
then all became still, and as no harm came to the maiden she lay down again and fell asleep.
but when she awoke again in broad daylight, what a sight met her eyes!
she was lying in a splendid room furnished with royal splendour; the walls were covered with golden flowers on a green ground; the bed was of ivory and the counterpane of velvet, and on a stool near by lay a pair of slippers studded with pearls.
the maiden thought she must be dreaming, but in came three servants richly dressed, who asked what were her commands.
"go," said the maiden," i will get up at once and cook the old man's supper for him, and then i will feed the pretty cock and hen and the brindled cow."
but the door opened and in came a handsome young man, who said," i am a king's son, and was condemned by a wicked witch to live as an old man in this wood with no company but that of my three servants, who were transformed into a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow.
the spell could only be broken by the arrival of a maiden who should show herself kind not only to men but to beasts.
you are that maiden, and last night at midnight we were freed, and this poor house was again transformed into my royal palace.
as they stood there the king's son told his three servants to go and fetch the maiden's parents to be present at the wedding feast.
"but where are my two sisters?"
asked the maid."
i shut them up in the cellar, but in the morning they shall be led forth into the forest and shall serve a charcoal burner until they have improved, and will never again suffer poor animals to go hungry."
uraschimataro and the turtle from the japanische marchen und sagen, von david brauns -lrb- leipzig: wilhelm friedrich -rrb-.
there was once a worthy old couple who lived on the coast, and supported themselves by fishing.
they had only one child, a son, who was their pride and joy, and for his sake they were ready to work hard all day long, and never felt tired or discontented with their lot.
this son's name was uraschimataro, which means in japanese, "son of the island," and he was a fine well-grown youth and a good fisherman, minding neither wind nor weather.
not the bravest sailor in the whole village dared venture so far out to sea as uraschimataro, and many a time the neighbours used to shake their heads and say to his parents, "if your son goes on being so rash, one day he will try his luck once too often, and the waves will end by swallowing him up."
but uraschimataro paid no heed to these remarks, and as he was really very clever in managing a boat, the old people were very seldom anxious about him.
one beautiful bright morning, as he was hauling his well-filled nets into the boat, he saw lying among the fishes a tiny little turtle.
he was delighted with his prize, and threw it into a wooden vessel to keep till he got home, when suddenly the turtle found its voice, and tremblingly begged for its life.
"after all," it said, "what good can i do you?
i am so young and small, and i would so gladly live a little longer.
be merciful and set me free, and i shall know how to prove my gratitude."
now uraschimataro was very good-natured, and besides, he could never bear to say no, so he picked up the turtle, and put it back into the sea.
years flew by, and every morning uraschimataro sailed his boat into the deep sea.
but one day as he was making for a little bay between some rocks, there arose a fierce whirlwind, which shattered his boat to pieces, and she was sucked under by the waves.
uraschimataro himself very nearly shared the same fate.
but he was a powerful swimmer, and struggled hard to reach the shore.
then he saw a large turtle coming towards him, and above the howling of the storm he heard what it said: "i am the turtle whose life you once saved.
i will now pay my debt and show my gratitude.
the land is still far distant, and without my help you would never get there.
climb on my back, and i will take you where you will."
uraschimataro did not wait to be asked twice, and thankfully accepted his friend's help.
but scarcely was he seated firmly on the shell, when the turtle proposed that they should not return to the shore at once, but go under the sea, and look at some of the wonders that lay hidden there.
uraschimataro agreed willingly, and in another moment they were deep, deep down, with fathoms of blue water above their heads.
oh, how quickly they darted through the still, warm sea!
the young man held tight, and marvelled where they were going and how long they were to travel, but for three days they rushed on, till at last the turtle stopped before a splendid palace, shining with gold and silver, crystal and precious stones, and decked here and there with branches of pale pink coral and glittering pearls.
but if uraschimataro was astonished at the beauty of the outside, he was struck dumb at the sight of the hall within, which was lighted by the blaze of fish scales.
"where have you brought me?"
he asked his guide in a low voice.
"to the palace of ringu, the house of the sea god, whose subjects we all are," answered the turtle."
i am the first waiting maid of his daughter, the lovely princess otohime, whom you will shortly see."
uraschimataro was still so puzzled with the adventures that had befallen him, that he waited in a dazed condition for what would happen next.
but the turtle, who had talked so much of him to the princess that she had expressed a wish to see him, went at once to make known his arrival.
and directly the princess beheld him her heart was set on him, and she begged him to stay with her, and in return promised that he should never grow old, neither should his beauty fade.
"is not that reward enough?"
she asked, smiling, looking all the while as fair as the sun itself.
and uraschimataro said "yes," and so he stayed there.
for how long?
that he only knew later.
his life passed by, and each hour seemed happier than the last, when one day there rushed over him a terrible longing to see his parents.
he fought against it hard, knowing how it would grieve the princess, but it grew on him stronger and stronger, till at length he became so sad that the princess inquired what was wrong.
then he told her of the longing he had to visit his old home, and that he must see his parents once more.
the princess was almost frozen with horror, and implored him to stay with her, or something dreadful would be sure to happen.
"you will never come back, and we shall meet again no more," she moaned bitterly.
but uraschimataro stood firm and repeated, "only this once will i leave you, and then will i return to your side for ever."
sadly the princess shook her head, but she answered slowly, "one way there is to bring you safely back, but i fear you will never agree to the conditions of the bargain.'"
i will do anything that will bring me back to you," exclaimed uraschimataro, looking at her tenderly, but the princess was silent: she knew too well that when he left her she would see his face no more.
then she took from a shelf a tiny golden box, and gave it to uraschimataro, praying him to keep it carefully, and above all things never to open it.
"if you can do this," she said as she bade him farewell, "your friend the turtle will meet you at the shore, and will carry you back to me."
uraschimataro thanked her from his heart, and swore solemnly to do her bidding.
he hid the box safely in his garments, seated himself on the back of the turtle, and vanished in the ocean path, waving his hand to the princess.
three days and three nights they swam through the sea, and at length uraschimataro arrived at the beach which lay before his old home.
the turtle bade him farewell, and was gone in a moment.
uraschimataro drew near to the village with quick and joyful steps.
he saw the smoke curling through the roof, and the thatch where green plants had thickly sprouted.
he heard the children shouting and calling, and from a window that he passed came the twang of the koto, and everything seemed to cry a welcome for his return.
yet suddenly he felt a pang at his heart as he wandered down the street.
after all, everything was changed.
neither men nor houses were those he once knew.
quickly he saw his old home; yes, it was still there, but it had a strange look.
anxiously he knocked at the door, and asked the woman who opened it after his parents.
but she did not know their names, and could give him no news of them.
still more disturbed, he rushed to the burying ground, the only place that could tell him what he wished to know.
here at any rate he would find out what it all meant.
and he was right.
in a moment he stood before the grave of his parents, and the date written on the stone was almost exactly the date when they had lost their son, and he had forsaken them for the daughter of the sea.
and so he found that since he had deft his home, three hundred years had passed by.
shuddering with horror at his discovery he turned back into the village street, hoping to meet some one who could tell him of the days of old.
but when the man spoke, he knew he was not dreaming, though he felt as if he had lost his senses.
in despair he bethought him of the box which was the gift of the princess.
perhaps after all this dreadful thing was not true.
he might be the victim of some enchanter's spell, and in his hand lay the counter-charm.
almost unconsciously he opened it, and a purple vapour came pouring out.
he held the empty box in his hand, and as he looked he saw that the fresh hand of youth had grown suddenly shrivelled, like the hand of an old, old man.
he ran to the brook, which flowed in a clear stream down from the mountain.
and saw himself reflected as in a mirror.
it was the face of a mummy which looked back at him.
wounded to death, he crept back through the village, and no man knew the old, old man to be the strong handsome youth who had run down the street an hour before.
so he toiled wearily back, till he reached the shore, and here he sat sadly on a rock, and called loudly on the turtle.
but she never came back any more, but instead, death came soon, and set him free.
but before that happened, the people who saw him sitting lonely on the shore had heard his story, and when their children were restless they used to tell them of the good son who from love to his parents had given up for their sakes the splendour and wonders of the palace in the sea, and the most beautiful woman in the world besides.
the slaying of the tanuki from the japanische murchen und sagen.
near a big river, and between two high mountains, a man and his wife lived in a cottage a long, long time ago.
a dense forest lay all round the cottage, and there was hardly a path or a tree in the whole wood that was not familiar to the peasant from his boyhood.
in one of his wanderings he had made friends with a hare, and many an hour the two passed together, when the man was resting by the roadside, eating his dinner.
now this strange friendship was observed by the tanuki, a wicked, quarrelsome beast, who hated the peasant, and was never tired of doing him an ill turn.
again and again he had crept to the hut, and finding some choice morsel put away for the little hare, had either eaten it if he thought it nice, or trampled it to pieces so that no one else should get it, and at last the peasant lost patience, and made up his mind he would have the tanuki's blood.
so for many days the man lay hidden, waiting for the tanuki to come by, and when one morning he marched up the road thinking of nothing but the dinner he was going to steal, the peasant threw himself upon him and bound his four legs tightly, so that he could not move.
then he dragged his enemy joyfully to the house, feeling that at length he had got the better of the mischievous beast which had done him so many ill turns.
"he shall pay for them with his skin," he said to his wife.
"we will first kill him, and then cook him."
so saying, he hanged the tanuki, head downwards, to a beam, and went out to gather wood for a fire.
meanwhile the old woman was standing at the mortar pounding the rise that was to serve them for the week with a pestle that made her arms ache with its weight.
suddenly she heard something whining and weeping in the corner, and, stopping her work, she looked round to see what it was.
that was all that the rascal wanted, and he put on directly his most humble air, and begged the woman in his softest voice to loosen his bonds, which her hurting him sorely.
she was filled with pity for him, but did not dare to set him free, as she knew that her husband would be very angry.
the tanuki, however, did not despair, and seeing that her heart was softened, began his prayers anew.
"he only asked to have his bonds taken from him," he said.
"he would give his word not to attempt to escape, and if he was once set free he could soon pound her rice for her."
"then you can have a little rest," he went on, "for rice pounding is very tiring work, and not at all fit for weak women."
these last words melted the good woman completely, and she unfastened the bonds that held him.
poor foolish creature!
in one moment the tanuki had seized her, stripped off all her clothes, and popped her in the mortar.
in a few minutes more she was pounded as fine as the rice; and not content with that, the tanuki placed a pot on the hearth and made ready to cook the peasant a dinner from the flesh of his own wife!
when everything was complete he looked out of the door, and saw the old man coming from the forest carrying a large bundle of wood.
quick as lightning the tanuki not only put on the woman's clothes, but, as he was a magician, assumed her form as well.
then he took the wood, kindled the fire, and very soon set a large dinner before the old man, who was very hungry, and had forgotten for the moment all about his enemy.
but when the tanuki saw that he had eaten his fill and would be thinking about his prisoner, he hastily shook off the clothes behind a door and took his own shape.
then he said to the peasant, "you are a nice sort of person to seize animals and to talk of killing them!
you are caught in your own net.
it is your own wife that you have eaten, and if you want to find her bones you have only to look under the floor."
with these words he turned and made for the forest.
the old peasant grew cold with horror as he listened, and seemed frozen to the place where he stood.
when he had recovered himself a little, he collected the bones of his dead wife, buried them in the garden, and swore over the grave to be avenged on the tanuki.
after everything was done he sat himself down in his lonely cottage and wept bitterly, and the bitterest thought of all was that he would never be able to forget that he had eaten his own wife.
while he was thus weeping and wailing his friend the hare passed by, and, hearing the noise, pricked up his ears and soon recognised the old man's voice.
he wondered what had happened, and put his head in at the door and asked if anything was the matter.
with tears and groans the peasant told him the whole dreadful story, and the hare, filled with anger and compassion, comforted him as best he could, and promised to help him in his revenge.
"the false knave shall not go unpunished," said he.
so the first thing he did was to search the house for materials to make an ointment, which he sprinkled plentifully with pepper and then put in his pocket.
next he took a hatchet, bade farewell to the old man, and departed to the forest.
he bent his steps to the dwelling of the tanuki and knocked at the door.
the tanuki, who had no cause to suspect the hare, was greatly pleased to see him, for he noticed the hatchet at once, and began to lay plots how to get hold of it.
to do this he thought he had better offer to accompany the hare, which was exactly what the hare wished and expected, for he knew all the tanuki's cunning, and understood his little ways.
so he accepted the rascal's company with joy, and made himself very pleasant as they strolled along.
when they were wandering in this manner through the forest the hare carelessly raised his hatchet in passing, and cut down some thick boughs that were hanging over the path, but at length, after cutting down a good big tree, which cost him many hard blows, he declared that it was too heavy for him to carry home, and he must just leave it where it was.
this delighted the greedy tanuki, who said that they would be no weight for him, so they collected the large branches, which the hare bound tightly on his back.
then he trotted gaily to the house, the hare following after with his lighter bundle.
by this time the hare had decided what he would do, and as soon as they arrived, he quietly set on fire the wood on the back of the tanuki.
the tanuki, who was busy with something else, observed nothing, and only called out to ask what was the meaning of the crackling that he heard.
"it is just the rattle of the stones which are rolling down the side of the mountain," the hare said; and the tanuki was content, and made no further remarks, never noticing that the noise really sprang from the burning boughs on his back, until his fur was in flames, and it was almost too late to put it out.
shrieking with pain, he let fall the burning wood from his back, and stamped and howled with agony.
but the hare comforted him, and told him that he always carried with him an excellent plaster in case of need, which would bring him instant relief, and taking out his ointment he spread it on a leaf of bamboo, and laid it on the wound.
no sooner did it touch him than the tanuki leapt yelling into the air, and the hare laughed, and ran to tell his friend the peasant what a trick he had played on their enemy.
but the old man shook his head sadly, for he knew that the villain was only crushed for the moment, and that he would shortly be revenging himself upon them.
no, the only way every to get any peace and quiet was to render the tanuki harmless for ever.
long did the old man and the hare puzzle together how this was to be done, and at last they decided that they would make two boats, a small one of wood and a large one of clay.
then they fell to work at once, and when the boats were ready and properly painted, the hare went to the tanuki, who was still very ill, and invited him to a great fish-catching.
the tanuki was still feeling angry with the hare about the trick he had played him, but he was weak and very hungry, so he gladly accepted the proposal, and accompanied the hare to the bank of the river, where the two boats were moored, rocked by the waves.
they both looked exactly alike, and the tanuki only saw that one was bigger than the other, and would hold more fish, so he sprang into the large one, while the hare climbed into the one which was made of wood.
they loosened their moorings, and made for the middle of the stream, and when they were at some distance from the bank, the hare took his oar, and struck such a heavy blow at the other boat, that it broke in two.
the tanuki fell straight into the water, and was held there by the hare till he was quite dead.
then he put the body in his boat and rowed to land, and told the old man that his enemy was dead at last.
and the old man rejoiced that his wife was avenged, and he took the hare into his house, and they lived together all their days in peace and quietness upon the mountain.
the flying trunk translated from the german of hans andersen.
there was once a merchant who was so rich that he could have paved the whole street, and perhaps even a little side-street besides, with silver.
but he did not do that; he knew another way of spending his money.
if he spent a shilling he got back a florin-such an excellent merchant he was till he died.
now his son inherited all this money.
he lived very merrily; he went every night to the theatre, made paper kites out of five-pound notes, and played ducks and drakes with sovereigns instead of stones.
in this way the money was likely to come soon to an end, and so it did.
at last he had nothing left but four shillings, and he had no clothes except a pair of slippers and an old dressing-gown.
his friends did not trouble themselves any more about him; they would not even walk down the street with him.
but one of them who was rather good-natured sent him an old trunk with the message, "pack up!"
that was all very well, but he had nothing to pack up, so he got into the trunk himself.
it was an enchanted trunk, for as soon as the lock was pressed it could fly.
he pressed it, and away he flew in it up the chimney, high into the clouds, further and further away.
but whenever the bottom gave a little creak he was in terror lest the trunk should go to pieces, for then he would have turned a dreadful somersault-just think of it!
in this way he arrived at the land of the turks.
he hid the trunk in a wood under some dry leaves, and then walked into the town.
he could do that quite well, for all the turks were dressed just as he was-in a dressing-gown and slippers.
he met a nurse with a little child.
"halloa!
you turkish nurse," said he, "what is that great castle there close to the town?
the one with the windows so high up?"
"the sultan's daughter lives there," she replied.
"it is prophesied that she will be very unlucky in her husband, and so no one is allowed to see her except when the sultan and sultana are by."
"thank you," said the merchant's son, and he went into the wood, sat himself in his trunk, flew on to the roof, and crept through the window into the princess's room.
she was lying on the sofa asleep, and was so beautiful that the young merchant had to kiss her.
then she woke up and was very much frightened, but he said he was a turkish god who had come through the air to see her, and that pleased her very much.
they sat close to each other, and he told her a story about her eyes.
they were beautiful dark lakes in which her thoughts swam about like mermaids.
and her forehead was a snowy mountain, grand and shining.
these were lovely stories.
then he asked the princess to marry him, and she said yes at once.
"but you must come here on saturday," she said, "for then the sultan and the sultana are coming to tea with me.
they will be indeed proud that i receive the god of the turks.
but mind you have a really good story ready, for my parents like them immensely.
my mother likes something rather moral and high-flown, and my father likes something merry to make him laugh."
"yes, i shall only bring a fairy story for my dowry," said he, and so they parted.
but the princess gave him a sabre set with gold pieces which he could use.
then he flew away, bought himself a new dressing-gown, and sat down in the wood and began to make up a story, for it had to be ready by saturday, and that was no easy matter.
when he had it ready it was saturday.
the sultan, the sultana, and the whole court were at tea with the princess.
he was most graciously received.
"will you tell us a story?"
said the sultana; "one that is thoughtful and instructive?"
"but something that we can laugh at," said the sultan.
"oh, certainly," he replied, and began: "now, listen attentively.
there was once a box of matches which lay between a tinder-box and an old iron pot, and they told the story of their youth."
""we used to be on the green fir-boughs.
every morning and evening we had diamond-tea, which was the dew, and the whole day long we had sunshine, and the little birds used to tell us stories.
we were very rich, because the other trees only dressed in summer, but we had green dresses in summer and in winter.
then the woodcutter came, and our family was split up.
we have now the task of making light for the lowest people.
that is why we grand people are in the kitchen.""
""my fate was quite different," said the iron pot, near which the matches lay."
""since i came into the world i have been many times scoured, and have cooked much.
my only pleasure is to have a good chat with my companions when i am lying nice and clean in my place after dinner.""
""now you are talking too fast," spluttered the fire."
""yes, let us decide who is the grandest!"
said the matches."
""no, i do n't like talking about myself," said the pot."
""let us arrange an evening's entertainment.
i will tell the story of my life."
""on the baltic by the danish shore -" "what a beautiful beginning!"
said all the plates.
""that's a story that will please us all."
"and the end was just as good as the beginning.
all the plates clattered for joy."
""now i will dance," said the tongs, and she danced.
oh!
how high she could kick!
"the old chair-cover in the corner split when he saw her.
"the urn would have sung but she said she had a cold; she could not sing unless she boiled.
"in the window was an old quill pen.
there was nothing remarkable about her except that she had been dipped too deeply into the ink.
but she was very proud of that."
""if the urn will not sing," said she, "outside the door hangs a nightingale in a cage who will sing.""
""i do n't think it's proper," said the kettle, "that such a foreign bird should be heard.""
""oh, let us have some acting," said everyone.
""do let us!"
"suddenly the door opened and the maid came in.
everyone was quite quiet.
there was not a sound.
but each pot knew what he might have done, and how grand he was.
"the maid took the matches and lit the fire with them.
how they spluttered and flamed, to be sure!
""now everyone can see," they thought, "that we are the grandest!
how we sparkle!
what a light -" "but here they were burnt out."
"that was a delightful story!"
said the sultana."
i quite feel myself in the kitchen with the matches.
yes, now you shall marry our daughter."
"yes, indeed," said the sultan, "you shall marry our daughter on monday."
and they treated the young man as one of the family.
the wedding was arranged, and the night before the whole town was illuminated.
biscuits and gingerbreads were thrown among the people, the street boys stood on tiptoe crying hurrahs and whistling through their fingers.
it was all splendid.
"now i must also give them a treat," thought the merchant's son.
and so he bought rockets, crackers, and all the kinds of fireworks you can think of, put them in his trunk, and flew up with them into the air.
whirr-r-r, how they fizzed and blazed!
all the turks jumped so high that their slippers flew above their heads; such a splendid glitter they had never seen before.
now they could quite well understand that it was the god of the turks himself who was to marry the princess.
as soon as the young merchant came down again into the wood with his trunk he thought, "now i will just go into the town to see how the show has taken."
and it was quite natural that he should want to do this.
oh!
what stories the people had to tell!
each one whom he asked had seen it differently, but they had all found it beautiful."
i saw the turkish god himself," said one.
"he had eyes like glittering stars, and a beard like foaming water."
"he flew away in a cloak of fire," said another.
they were splendid things that he heard, and the next day was to be his wedding day.
then he went back into the wood to sit in his trunk; but what had become of it?
the trunk had been burnt.
a spark of the fireworks had set it alight, and the trunk was in ashes.
he could no longer fly, and could never reach his bride.
she stood the whole day long on the roof and waited; perhaps she is waiting there still.
but he wandered through the world and told stories; though they are not so merry as the one he told about the matches.
the snow-man translated from the german of hans andersen.
"how astonishingly cold it is!
my body is cracking all over!"
said the snow-man.
"the wind is really cutting one's very life out!
and how that fiery thing up there glares!"
he meant the sun, which was just setting.
"it sha'n' t make me blink, though, and i shall keep quite cool and collected."
instead of eyes he had two large three-cornered pieces of slate in his head; his mouth consisted of an old rake, so that he had teeth as well.
he was born amidst the shouts and laughter of the boys, and greeted by the jingling bells and cracking whips of the sledges.
the sun went down, the full moon rose, large, round, clear and beautiful, in the dark blue sky.
"there it is again on the other side!"
said the snow-man, by which he meant the sun was appearing again."
i have become quite accustomed to its glaring.
i hope it will hang there and shine, so that i may be able to see myself.
i wish i knew, though, how one ought to see about changing one's position.
i should very much like to move about.
if i only could, i would glide up and down the ice there, as i saw the boys doing; but somehow or other, i do n't know how to run."
"bow-wow!"
barked the old yard-dog; he was rather hoarse and could n't bark very well.
his hoarseness came on when he was a house-dog and used to lie in front of the stove.
"the sun will soon teach you to run!
i saw that last winter with your predecessor, and farther back still with his predecessors!
they have all run away!'"
i do n't understand you, my friend," said the snow-man.
"that thing up there is to teach me to run?"
he meant the moon.
"well, it certainly did run just now, for i saw it quite plainly over there, and now here it is on this side."
"you know nothing at all about it," said the yard-dog.
"why, you have only just been made.
the thing you see there is the moon; the other thing you saw going down the other side was the sun.
he will come up again tomorrow morning, and will soon teach you how to run away down the gutter.
the weather is going to change; i feel it already by the pain in my left hind-leg; the weather is certainly going to change.'"
i ca n't understand him," said the snow-man; "but i have an idea that he is speaking of something unpleasant.
that thing that glares so, and then disappears, the sun, as he calls it, is not my friend.
i know that by instinct."
"bow-wow!"
barked the yard-dog, and walked three times round himself, and then crept into his kennel to sleep.
the weather really did change.
towards morning a dense damp fog lay over the whole neighbourhood; later on came an icy wind, which sent the frost packing.
but when the sun rose, it was a glorious sight.
the trees and shrubs were covered with rime, and looked like a wood of coral, and every branch was thick with long white blossoms.
the most delicate twigs, which are lost among the foliage in summer-time, came now into prominence, and it was like a spider's web of glistening white.
the lady-birches waved in the wind; and when the sun shone, everything glittered and sparkled as if it were sprinkled with diamond dust, and great diamonds were lying on the snowy carpet.
"is n't it wonderful?"
exclaimed a girl who was walking with a young man in the garden.
they stopped near the snow-man, and looked at the glistening trees.
"summer can not show a more beautiful sight," she said, with her eyes shining.
"and one ca n't get a fellow like this in summer either," said the young man, pointing to the snow-man.
"he's a beauty!"
the girl laughed, and nodded to the snow-man, and then they both danced away over the snow.
"who were those two?"
asked the snow-man of the yard-dog.
"you have been in this yard longer than i have.
do you know who they are?"
"do i know them indeed?"
answered the yard-dog.
"she has often stroked me, and he has given me bones.
i do n't bite either of them!"
"but what are they?"
asked the snow-man.
"lovers!"
replied the yard-dog.
turley fell to the tomahawk of the terrible panther, who ultimately cut a way through the pirates with tiger lily and a small remnant of the tribe.
to what extent hook is to blame for his tactics on this occasion is for the historian to decide.
had he waited on the rising ground till the proper hour he and his men would probably have been butchered; and in judging him it is only fair to take this into account.
what he should perhaps have done was to acquaint his opponents that he proposed to follow a new method.
on the other hand, this, as destroying the element of surprise, would have made his strategy of no avail, so that the whole question is beset with difficulties.
one can not at least withhold a reluctant admiration for the wit that had conceived so bold a scheme, and the fell -lsb- deadly -rsb- genius with which it was carried out.
what were his own feelings about himself at that triumphant moment?
fain -lsb- gladly -rsb- would his dogs have known, as breathing heavily and wiping their cutlasses, they gathered at a discreet distance from his hook, and squinted through their ferret eyes at this extraordinary man.
elation must have been in his heart, but his face did not reflect it: ever a dark and solitary enigma, he stood aloof from his followers in spirit as in substance.
the night's work was not yet over, for it was not the redskins he had come out to destroy; they were but the bees to be smoked, so that he should get at the honey.
it was pan he wanted, pan and wendy and their band, but chiefly pan.
peter was such a small boy that one tends to wonder at the man's hatred of him.
true he had flung hook's arm to the crocodile, but even this and the increased insecurity of life to which it led, owing to the crocodile's pertinacity -lsb- persistance -rsb-, hardly account for a vindictiveness so relentless and malignant.
the truth is that there was a something about peter which goaded the pirate captain to frenzy.
it was not his courage, it was not his engaging appearance, it was not --.
there is no beating about the bush, for we know quite well what it was, and have got to tell.
it was peter's cockiness.
this had got on hook's nerves; it made his iron claw twitch, and at night it disturbed him like an insect.
while peter lived, the tortured man felt that he was a lion in a cage into which a sparrow had come.
the question now was how to get down the trees, or how to get his dogs down?
he ran his greedy eyes over them, searching for the thinnest ones.
they wriggled uncomfortably, for they knew he would not scruple -lsb- hesitate -rsb- to ram them down with poles.
in the meantime, what of the boys?
we have seen them at the first clang of the weapons, turned as it were into stone figures, open-mouthed, all appealing with outstretched arms to peter; and we return to them as their mouths close, and their arms fall to their sides.
the pandemonium above has ceased almost as suddenly as it arose, passed like a fierce gust of wind; but they know that in the passing it has determined their fate.
which side had won?
the pirates, listening avidly at the mouths of the trees, heard the question put by every boy, and alas, they also heard peter's answer.
""if the redskins have won," he said, "they will beat the tom-tom; it is always their sign of victory."
now smee had found the tom-tom, and was at that moment sitting on it.
""you will never hear the tom-tom again," he muttered, but inaudibly of course, for strict silence had been enjoined -lsb- urged -rsb-.
to his amazement hook signed him to beat the tom-tom, and slowly there came to smee an understanding of the dreadful wickedness of the order.
never, probably, had this simple man admired hook so much.
twice smee beat upon the instrument, and then stopped to listen gleefully.
""the tom-tom," the miscreants heard peter cry; "an indian victory!"
the doomed children answered with a cheer that was music to the black hearts above, and almost immediately they repeated their good-byes to peter.
this puzzled the pirates, but all their other feelings were swallowed by a base delight that the enemy were about to come up the trees.
they smirked at each other and rubbed their hands.
rapidly and silently hook gave his orders: one man to each tree, and the others to arrange themselves in a line two yards apart.
chapter 13 do you believe in fairies?
the more quickly this horror is disposed of the better.
the first to emerge from his tree was curly.
he rose out of it into the arms of cecco, who flung him to smee, who flung him to starkey, who flung him to bill jukes, who flung him to noodler, and so he was tossed from one to another till he fell at the feet of the black pirate.
all the boys were plucked from their trees in this ruthless manner; and several of them were in the air at a time, like bales of goods flung from hand to hand.
a different treatment was accorded to wendy, who came last.
with ironical politeness hook raised his hat to her, and, offering her his arm, escorted her to the spot where the others were being gagged.
he did it with such an air, he was so frightfully distingue -lsb- imposingly distinguished -rsb-, that she was too fascinated to cry out.
she was only a little girl.
perhaps it is tell-tale to divulge that for a moment hook entranced her, and we tell on her only because her slip led to strange results.
had she haughtily unhanded him -lrb- and we should have loved to write it of her -rrb-, she would have been hurled through the air like the others, and then hook would probably not have been present at the tying of the children; and had he not been at the tying he would not have discovered slightly's secret, and without the secret he could not presently have made his foul attempt on peter's life.
they were tied to prevent their flying away, doubled up with their knees close to their ears; and for the trussing of them the black pirate had cut a rope into nine equal pieces.
all went well until slightly's turn came, when he was found to be like those irritating parcels that use up all the string in going round and leave no tags -lsb- ends -rsb- with which to tie a knot.
the pirates kicked him in their rage, just as you kick the parcel -lrb- though in fairness you should kick the string -rrb-; and strange to say it was hook who told them to belay their violence.
his lip was curled with malicious triumph.
while his dogs were merely sweating because every time they tried to pack the unhappy lad tight in one part he bulged out in another, hook's master mind had gone far beneath slightly's surface, probing not for effects but for causes; and his exultation showed that he had found them.
slightly, white to the gills, knew that hook had surprised -lsb- discovered -rsb- his secret, which was this, that no boy so blown out could use a tree wherein an average man need stick.
poor slightly, most wretched of all the children now, for he was in a panic about peter, bitterly regretted what he had done.
madly addicted to the drinking of water when he was hot, he had swelled in consequence to his present girth, and instead of reducing himself to fit his tree he had, unknown to the others, whittled his tree to make it fit him.
sufficient of this hook guessed to persuade him that peter at last lay at his mercy, but no word of the dark design that now formed in the subterranean caverns of his mind crossed his lips; he merely signed that the captives were to be conveyed to the ship, and that he would be alone.
how to convey them?
hunched up in their ropes they might indeed be rolled down hill like barrels, but most of the way lay through a morass.
again hook's genius surmounted difficulties.
he indicated that the little house must be used as a conveyance.
the children were flung into it, four stout pirates raised it on their shoulders, the others fell in behind, and singing the hateful pirate chorus the strange procession set off through the wood.
i do n't know whether any of the children were crying; if so, the singing drowned the sound; but as the little house disappeared in the forest, a brave though tiny jet of smoke issued from its chimney as if defying hook.
hook saw it, and it did peter a bad service.
it dried up any trickle of pity for him that may have remained in the pirate's infuriated breast.
the first thing he did on finding himself alone in the fast falling night was to tiptoe to slightly's tree, and make sure that it provided him with a passage.
then for long he remained brooding; his hat of ill omen on the sward, so that any gentle breeze which had arisen might play refreshingly through his hair.
dark as were his thoughts his blue eyes were as soft as the periwinkle.
intently he listened for any sound from the nether world, but all was as silent below as above; the house under the ground seemed to be but one more empty tenement in the void.
was that boy asleep, or did he stand waiting at the foot of slightly's tree, with his dagger in his hand?
there was no way of knowing, save by going down.
hook let his cloak slip softly to the ground, and then biting his lips till a lewd blood stood on them, he stepped into the tree.
he was a brave man, but for a moment he had to stop there and wipe his brow, which was dripping like a candle.
then, silently, he let himself go into the unknown.
he arrived unmolested at the foot of the shaft, and stood still again, biting at his breath, which had almost left him.
as his eyes became accustomed to the dim light various objects in the home under the trees took shape; but the only one on which his greedy gaze rested, long sought for and found at last, was the great bed.
on the bed lay peter fast asleep.
unaware of the tragedy being enacted above, peter had continued, for a little time after the children left, to play gaily on his pipes: no doubt rather a forlorn attempt to prove to himself that he did not care.
then he decided not to take his medicine, so as to grieve wendy.
then he lay down on the bed outside the coverlet, to vex her still more; for she had always tucked them inside it, because you never know that you may not grow chilly at the turn of the night.
then he nearly cried; but it struck him how indignant she would be if he laughed instead; so he laughed a haughty laugh and fell asleep in the middle of it.
sometimes, though not often, he had dreams, and they were more painful than the dreams of other boys.
for hours he could not be separated from these dreams, though he wailed piteously in them.
they had to do, i think, with the riddle of his existence.
at such times it had been wendy's custom to take him out of bed and sit with him on her lap, soothing him in dear ways of her own invention, and when he grew calmer to put him back to bed before he quite woke up, so that he should not know of the indignity to which she had subjected him.
but on this occasion he had fallen at once into a dreamless sleep.
one arm dropped over the edge of the bed, one leg was arched, and the unfinished part of his laugh was stranded on his mouth, which was open, showing the little pearls.
thus defenceless hook found him.
he stood silent at the foot of the tree looking across the chamber at his enemy.
did no feeling of compassion disturb his sombre breast?
the man was not wholly evil; he loved flowers -lrb- i have been told -rrb- and sweet music -lrb- he was himself no mean performer on the harpsichord -rrb-; and, let it be frankly admitted, the idyllic nature of the scene stirred him profoundly.
mastered by his better self he would have returned reluctantly up the tree, but for one thing.
what stayed him was peter's impertinent appearance as he slept.
the open mouth, the drooping arm, the arched knee: they were such a personification of cockiness as, taken together, will never again, one may hope, be presented to eyes so sensitive to their offensiveness.
they steeled hook's heart.
if his rage had broken him into a hundred pieces every one of them would have disregarded the incident, and leapt at the sleeper.
though a light from the one lamp shone dimly on the bed, hook stood in darkness himself, and at the first stealthy step forward he discovered an obstacle, the door of slightly's tree.
it did not entirely fill the aperture, and he had been looking over it.
feeling for the catch, he found to his fury that it was low down, beyond his reach.
to his disordered brain it seemed then that the irritating quality in peter's face and figure visibly increased, and he rattled the door and flung himself against it.
was his enemy to escape him after all?
but what was that?
the red in his eye had caught sight of peter's medicine standing on a ledge within easy reach.
he fathomed what it was straightaway, and immediately knew that the sleeper was in his power.
lest he should be taken alive, hook always carried about his person a dreadful drug, blended by himself of all the death-dealing rings that had come into his possession.
these he had boiled down into a yellow liquid quite unknown to science, which was probably the most virulent poison in existence.
five drops of this he now added to peter's cup.
his hand shook, but it was in exultation rather than in shame.
as he did it he avoided glancing at the sleeper, but not lest pity should unnerve him; merely to avoid spilling.
then one long gloating look he cast upon his victim, and turning, wormed his way with difficulty up the tree.
as he emerged at the top he looked the very spirit of evil breaking from its hole.
donning his hat at its most rakish angle, he wound his cloak around him, holding one end in front as if to conceal his person from the night, of which it was the blackest part, and muttering strangely to himself, stole away through the trees.
peter slept on.
the light guttered -lsb- burned to edges -rsb- and went out, leaving the tenement in darkness; but still he slept.
it must have been not less than ten o'clock by the crocodile, when he suddenly sat up in his bed, wakened by he knew not what.
it was a soft cautious tapping on the door of his tree.
soft and cautious, but in that stillness it was sinister.
peter felt for his dagger till his hand gripped it.
then he spoke.
""who is that?"
for long there was no answer: then again the knock.
""who are you?"
no answer.
he was thrilled, and he loved being thrilled.
in two strides he reached the door.
unlike slightly's door, it filled the aperture -lsb- opening -rsb-, so that he could not see beyond it, nor could the one knocking see him.
""i wo n't open unless you speak," peter cried.
then at last the visitor spoke, in a lovely bell-like voice.
""let me in, peter."
it was tink, and quickly he unbarred to her.
she flew in excitedly, her face flushed and her dress stained with mud.
""what is it?"
""oh, you could never guess!"
she cried, and offered him three guesses.
""out with it!"
he shouted, and in one ungrammatical sentence, as long as the ribbons that conjurers -lsb- magicians -rsb- pull from their mouths, she told of the capture of wendy and the boys.
peter's heart bobbed up and down as he listened.
wendy bound, and on the pirate ship; she who loved everything to be just so!
""i'll rescue her!"
he cried, leaping at his weapons.
as he leapt he thought of something he could do to please her.
he could take his medicine.
his hand closed on the fatal draught.
""no!"
shrieked tinker bell, who had heard hook mutter about his deed as he sped through the forest.
""why not?"
""it is poisoned."
""poisoned?
who could have poisoned it?"
""hook."
""do n't be silly.
how could hook have got down here?"
alas, tinker bell could not explain this, for even she did not know the dark secret of slightly's tree.
nevertheless hook's words had left no room for doubt.
the cup was poisoned.
""besides," said peter, quite believing himself "i never fell asleep."
he raised the cup.
no time for words now; time for deeds; and with one of her lightning movements tink got between his lips and the draught, and drained it to the dregs.
""why, tink, how dare you drink my medicine?"
but she did not answer.
already she was reeling in the air.
""what is the matter with you?"
cried peter, suddenly afraid.
""it was poisoned, peter," she told him softly; "and now i am going to be dead."
""o tink, did you drink it to save me?"
""yes."
""but why, tink?"
her wings would scarcely carry her now, but in reply she alighted on his shoulder and gave his nose a loving bite.
she whispered in his ear "you silly ass," and then, tottering to her chamber, lay down on the bed.
his head almost filled the fourth wall of her little room as he knelt near her in distress.
every moment her light was growing fainter; and he knew that if it went out she would be no more.
she liked his tears so much that she put out her beautiful finger and let them run over it.
her voice was so low that at first he could not make out what she said.
then he made it out.
she was saying that she thought she could get well again if children believed in fairies.
peter flung out his arms.
there were no children there, and it was night time; but he addressed all who might be dreaming of the neverland, and who were therefore nearer to him than you think: boys and girls in their nighties, and naked papooses in their baskets hung from trees.
""do you believe?"
he cried.
tink sat up in bed almost briskly to listen to her fate.
she fancied she heard answers in the affirmative, and then again she was n't sure.
""what do you think?"
she asked peter.
""if you believe," he shouted to them, "clap your hands; do n't let tink die."
many clapped.
some did n't.
a few beasts hissed.
the clapping stopped suddenly; as if countless mothers had rushed to their nurseries to see what on earth was happening; but already tink was saved.
first her voice grew strong, then she popped out of bed, then she was flashing through the room more merry and impudent than ever.
she never thought of thanking those who believed, but she would have like to get at the ones who had hissed.
""and now to rescue wendy!"
the moon was riding in a cloudy heaven when peter rose from his tree, begirt -lsb- belted -rsb- with weapons and wearing little else, to set out upon his perilous quest.
it was not such a night as he would have chosen.
he had hoped to fly, keeping not far from the ground so that nothing unwonted should escape his eyes; but in that fitful light to have flown low would have meant trailing his shadow through the trees, thus disturbing birds and acquainting a watchful foe that he was astir.
he regretted now that he had given the birds of the island such strange names that they are very wild and difficult of approach.
there was no other course but to press forward in redskin fashion, at which happily he was an adept -lsb- expert -rsb-.
but in what direction, for he could not be sure that the children had been taken to the ship?
a light fall of snow had obliterated all footmarks; and a deathly silence pervaded the island, as if for a space nature stood still in horror of the recent carnage.
he had taught the children something of the forest lore that he had himself learned from tiger lily and tinker bell, and knew that in their dire hour they were not likely to forget it.
slightly, if he had an opportunity, would blaze -lsb- cut a mark in -rsb- the trees, for instance, curly would drop seeds, and wendy would leave her handkerchief at some important place.
the morning was needed to search for such guidance, and he could not wait.
the upper world had called him, but would give no help.
the crocodile passed him, but not another living thing, not a sound, not a movement; and yet he knew well that sudden death might be at the next tree, or stalking him from behind.
he swore this terrible oath: "hook or me this time."
now he crawled forward like a snake, and again erect, he darted across a space on which the moonlight played, one finger on his lip and his dagger at the ready.
he was frightfully happy.
chapter 14 the pirate ship one green light squinting over kidd's creek, which is near the mouth of the pirate river, marked where the brig, the jolly roger, lay, low in the water; a rakish-looking -lsb- speedy-looking -rsb- craft foul to the hull, every beam in her detestable, like ground strewn with mangled feathers.
she was the cannibal of the seas, and scarce needed that watchful eye, for she floated immune in the horror of her name.
she was wrapped in the blanket of night, through which no sound from her could have reached the shore.
there was little sound, and none agreeable save the whir of the ship's sewing machine at which smee sat, ever industrious and obliging, the essence of the commonplace, pathetic smee.
i know not why he was so infinitely pathetic, unless it were because he was so pathetically unaware of it; but even strong men had to turn hastily from looking at him, and more than once on summer evenings he had touched the fount of hook's tears and made it flow.
of this, as of almost everything else, smee was quite unconscious.
a few of the pirates leant over the bulwarks, drinking in the miasma -lsb- putrid mist -rsb- of the night; others sprawled by barrels over games of dice and cards; and the exhausted four who had carried the little house lay prone on the deck, where even in their sleep they rolled skillfully to this side or that out of hook's reach, lest he should claw them mechanically in passing.
hook trod the deck in thought.
o man unfathomable.
it was his hour of triumph.
peter had been removed for ever from his path, and all the other boys were in the brig, about to walk the plank.
it was his grimmest deed since the days when he had brought barbecue to heel; and knowing as we do how vain a tabernacle is man, could we be surprised had he now paced the deck unsteadily, bellied out by the winds of his success?
but there was no elation in his gait, which kept pace with the action of his sombre mind.
hook was profoundly dejected.
he was often thus when communing with himself on board ship in the quietude of the night.
it was because he was so terribly alone.
this inscrutable man never felt more alone than when surrounded by his dogs.
they were socially inferior to him.
hook was not his true name.
to reveal who he really was would even at this date set the country in a blaze; but as those who read between the lines must already have guessed, he had been at a famous public school; and its traditions still clung to him like garments, with which indeed they are largely concerned.
thus it was offensive to him even now to board a ship in the same dress in which he grappled -lsb- attacked -rsb- her, and he still adhered in his walk to the school's distinguished slouch.
but above all he retained the passion for good form.
good form!
however much he may have degenerated, he still knew that this is all that really matters.
from far within him he heard a creaking as of rusty portals, and through them came a stern tap-tap-tap, like hammering in the night when one can not sleep.
""have you been good form to-day?"
was their eternal question.
""fame, fame, that glittering bauble, it is mine," he cried.
""is it quite good form to be distinguished at anything?"
the tap-tap from his school replied.
""i am the only man whom barbecue feared," he urged, "and flint feared barbecue."
""barbecue, flint -- what house?"
came the cutting retort.
most disquieting reflection of all, was it not bad form to think about good form?
his vitals were tortured by this problem.
it was a claw within him sharper than the iron one; and as it tore him, the perspiration dripped down his tallow -lsb- waxy -rsb- countenance and streaked his doublet.
ofttimes he drew his sleeve across his face, but there was no damming that trickle.
ah, envy not hook.
there came to him a presentiment of his early dissolution -lsb- death -rsb-.
it was as if peter's terrible oath had boarded the ship.
hook felt a gloomy desire to make his dying speech, lest presently there should be no time for it.
""better for hook," he cried, "if he had had less ambition!"
it was in his darkest hours only that he referred to himself in the third person.
""no little children to love me!"
strange that he should think of this, which had never troubled him before; perhaps the sewing machine brought it to his mind.
for long he muttered to himself, staring at smee, who was hemming placidly, under the conviction that all children feared him.
feared him!
feared smee!
there was not a child on board the brig that night who did not already love him.
he had said horrid things to them and hit them with the palm of his hand, because he could not hit with his fist, but they had only clung to him the more.
michael had tried on his spectacles.
to tell poor smee that they thought him lovable!
hook itched to do it, but it seemed too brutal.
instead, he revolved this mystery in his mind: why do they find smee lovable?
he pursued the problem like the sleuth-hound that he was.
if smee was lovable, what was it that made him so?
a terrible answer suddenly presented itself -- "good form?"
had the bo "sun good form without knowing it, which is the best form of all?
he remembered that you have to prove you do n't know you have it before you are eligible for pop -lsb- an elite social club at eton -rsb-.
with a cry of rage he raised his iron hand over smee's head; but he did not tear.
what arrested him was this reflection: "to claw a man because he is good form, what would that be?"
""bad form!"
the unhappy hook was as impotent -lsb- powerless -rsb- as he was damp, and he fell forward like a cut flower.
his dogs thinking him out of the way for a time, discipline instantly relaxed; and they broke into a bacchanalian -lsb- drunken -rsb- dance, which brought him to his feet at once, all traces of human weakness gone, as if a bucket of water had passed over him.
""quiet, you scugs," he cried, "or i'll cast anchor in you;" and at once the din was hushed.
""are all the children chained, so that they can not fly away?"
""ay, ay."
""then hoist them up."
the wretched prisoners were dragged from the hold, all except wendy, and ranged in line in front of him.
for a time he seemed unconscious of their presence.
he lolled at his ease, humming, not unmelodiously, snatches of a rude song, and fingering a pack of cards.
ever and anon the light from his cigar gave a touch of colour to his face.
""now then, bullies," he said briskly, "six of you walk the plank to-night, but i have room for two cabin boys.
which of you is it to be?"
""do n't irritate him unnecessarily," had been wendy's instructions in the hold; so tootles stepped forward politely.
tootles hated the idea of signing under such a man, but an instinct told him that it would be prudent to lay the responsibility on an absent person; and though a somewhat silly boy, he knew that mothers alone are always willing to be the buffer.
all children know this about mothers, and despise them for it, but make constant use of it.
so tootles explained prudently, "you see, sir, i do n't think my mother would like me to be a pirate.
would your mother like you to be a pirate, slightly?"
he winked at slightly, who said mournfully, "i do n't think so," as if he wished things had been otherwise.
""would your mother like you to be a pirate, twin?"
""i do n't think so," said the first twin, as clever as the others.
""nibs, would --" "stow this gab," roared hook, and the spokesmen were dragged back.
""you, boy," he said, addressing john, "you look as if you had a little pluck in you.
didst never want to be a pirate, my hearty?"
now john had sometimes experienced this hankering at maths.
prep.; and he was struck by hook's picking him out.
""i once thought of calling myself red-handed jack," he said diffidently.
""and a good name too.
we'll call you that here, bully, if you join."
""what do you think, michael?"
asked john.
""what would you call me if i join?"
michael demanded.
""blackbeard joe."
michael was naturally impressed.
""what do you think, john?"
he wanted john to decide, and john wanted him to decide.
""shall we still be respectful subjects of the king?"
john inquired.
through hook's teeth came the answer: "you would have to swear, "down with the king.""
perhaps john had not behaved very well so far, but he shone out now.
""then i refuse," he cried, banging the barrel in front of hook.
""and i refuse," cried michael.
""rule britannia!"
squeaked curly.
the infuriated pirates buffeted them in the mouth; and hook roared out, "that seals your doom.
bring up their mother.
get the plank ready."
they were only boys, and they went white as they saw jukes and cecco preparing the fatal plank.
but they tried to look brave when wendy was brought up.
no words of mine can tell you how wendy despised those pirates.
to the boys there was at least some glamour in the pirate calling; but all that she saw was that the ship had not been tidied for years.
there was not a porthole on the grimy glass of which you might not have written with your finger "dirty pig"; and she had already written it on several.
but as the boys gathered round her she had no thought, of course, save for them.
""so, my beauty," said hook, as if he spoke in syrup, "you are to see your children walk the plank."
fine gentlemen though he was, the intensity of his communings had soiled his ruff, and suddenly he knew that she was gazing at it.
with a hasty gesture he tried to hide it, but he was too late.
""are they to die?"
asked wendy, with a look of such frightful contempt that he nearly fainted.
""they are," he snarled.
""silence all," he called gloatingly, "for a mother's last words to her children."
at this moment wendy was grand.
""these are my last words, dear boys," she said firmly.
""i feel that i have a message to you from your real mothers, and it is this: "we hope our sons will die like english gentlemen.""
even the pirates were awed, and tootles cried out hysterically, "i am going to do what my mother hopes.
what are you to do, nibs?"
""what my mother hopes.
what are you to do, twin?"
""what my mother hopes.
john, what are --" but hook had found his voice again.
""tie her up!"
he shouted.
it was smee who tied her to the mast.
""see here, honey," he whispered, "i'll save you if you promise to be my mother."
but not even for smee would she make such a promise.
""i would almost rather have no children at all," she said disdainfully -lsb- scornfully -rsb-.
it is sad to know that not a boy was looking at her as smee tied her to the mast; the eyes of all were on the plank: that last little walk they were about to take.
they were no longer able to hope that they would walk it manfully, for the capacity to think had gone from them; they could stare and shiver only.
hook smiled on them with his teeth closed, and took a step toward wendy.
his intention was to turn her face so that she should see the boys walking the plank one by one.
but he never reached her, he never heard the cry of anguish he hoped to wring from her.
he heard something else instead.
it was the terrible tick-tick of the crocodile.
they all heard it -- pirates, boys, wendy; and immediately every head was blown in one direction; not to the water whence the sound proceeded, but toward hook.
all knew that what was about to happen concerned him alone, and that from being actors they were suddenly become spectators.
very frightful was it to see the change that came over him.
it was as if he had been clipped at every joint.
he fell in a little heap.
the sound came steadily nearer; and in advance of it came this ghastly thought, "the crocodile is about to board the ship!"
even the iron claw hung inactive; as if knowing that it was no intrinsic part of what the attacking force wanted.
left so fearfully alone, any other man would have lain with his eyes shut where he fell: but the gigantic brain of hook was still working, and under its guidance he crawled on the knees along the deck as far from the sound as he could go.
the pirates respectfully cleared a passage for him, and it was only when he brought up against the bulwarks that he spoke.
""hide me!"
he cried hoarsely.
they gathered round him, all eyes averted from the thing that was coming aboard.
they had no thought of fighting it.
it was fate.
only when hook was hidden from them did curiosity loosen the limbs of the boys so that they could rush to the ship's side to see the crocodile climbing it.
then they got the strangest surprise of the night of nights; for it was no crocodile that was coming to their aid.
it was peter.
he signed to them not to give vent to any cry of admiration that might rouse suspicion.
then he went on ticking.
chapter 15 "hook or me this time" odd things happen to all of us on our way through life without our noticing for a time that they have happened.
thus, to take an instance, we suddenly discover that we have been deaf in one ear for we do n't know how long, but, say, half an hour.
now such an experience had come that night to peter.
when last we saw him he was stealing across the island with one finger to his lips and his dagger at the ready.
he had seen the crocodile pass by without noticing anything peculiar about it, but by and by he remembered that it had not been ticking.
at first he thought this eerie, but soon concluded rightly that the clock had run down.
without giving a thought to what might be the feelings of a fellow-creature thus abruptly deprived of its closest companion, peter began to consider how he could turn the catastrophe to his own use; and he decided to tick, so that wild beasts should believe he was the crocodile and let him pass unmolested.
he ticked superbly, but with one unforeseen result.
the crocodile was among those who heard the sound, and it followed him, though whether with the purpose of regaining what it had lost, or merely as a friend under the belief that it was again ticking itself, will never be certainly known, for, like slaves to a fixed idea, it was a stupid beast.
peter reached the shore without mishap, and went straight on, his legs encountering the water as if quite unaware that they had entered a new element.
thus many animals pass from land to water, but no other human of whom i know.
as he swam he had but one thought: "hook or me this time."
he had ticked so long that he now went on ticking without knowing that he was doing it.
had he known he would have stopped, for to board the brig by help of the tick, though an ingenious idea, had not occurred to him.
on the contrary, he thought he had scaled her side as noiseless as a mouse; and he was amazed to see the pirates cowering from him, with hook in their midst as abject as if he had heard the crocodile.
the crocodile!
no sooner did peter remember it than he heard the ticking.
at first he thought the sound did come from the crocodile, and he looked behind him swiftly.
then he realised that he was doing it himself, and in a flash he understood the situation.
""how clever of me!"
he thought at once, and signed to the boys not to burst into applause.
it was at this moment that ed teynte the quartermaster emerged from the forecastle and came along the deck.
now, reader, time what happened by your watch.
peter struck true and deep.
john clapped his hands on the ill-fated pirate's mouth to stifle the dying groan.
he fell forward.
four boys caught him to prevent the thud.
peter gave the signal, and the carrion was cast overboard.
there was a splash, and then silence.
how long has it taken?
""one!"
-lrb- slightly had begun to count. -rrb-
none too soon, peter, every inch of him on tiptoe, vanished into the cabin; for more than one pirate was screwing up his courage to look round.
they could hear each other's distressed breathing now, which showed them that the more terrible sound had passed.
""it's gone, captain," smee said, wiping off his spectacles.
""all's still again."
slowly hook let his head emerge from his ruff, and listened so intently that he could have caught the echo of the tick.
there was not a sound, and he drew himself up firmly to his full height.
""then here's to johnny plank!"
he cried brazenly, hating the boys more than ever because they had seen him unbend.
he broke into the villainous ditty: "yo ho, yo ho, the frisky plank, you walks along it so, till it goes down and you goes down to davy jones below!"
to terrorize the prisoners the more, though with a certain loss of dignity, he danced along an imaginary plank, grimacing at them as he sang; and when he finished he cried, "do you want a touch of the cat -lsb- o" nine tails -rsb- before you walk the plank?"
at that they fell on their knees.
""no, no!"
they cried so piteously that every pirate smiled.
""fetch the cat, jukes," said hook; "it's in the cabin."
the cabin!
peter was in the cabin!
the children gazed at each other.
""ay, ay," said jukes blithely, and he strode into the cabin.
they followed him with their eyes; they scarce knew that hook had resumed his song, his dogs joining in with him: "yo ho, yo ho, the scratching cat, its tails are nine, you know, and when they're writ upon your back --" what was the last line will never be known, for of a sudden the song was stayed by a dreadful screech from the cabin.
it wailed through the ship, and died away.
then was heard a crowing sound which was well understood by the boys, but to the pirates was almost more eerie than the screech.
""what was that?"
cried hook.
""two," said slightly solemnly.
the italian cecco hesitated for a moment and then swung into the cabin.
he tottered out, haggard.
""what's the matter with bill jukes, you dog?"
hissed hook, towering over him.
""the matter wi" him is he's dead, stabbed," replied cecco in a hollow voice.
""bill jukes dead!"
cried the startled pirates.
""the cabin's as black as a pit," cecco said, almost gibbering, "but there is something terrible in there: the thing you heard crowing."
the exultation of the boys, the lowering looks of the pirates, both were seen by hook.
""cecco," he said in his most steely voice, "go back and fetch me out that doodle-doo."
cecco, bravest of the brave, cowered before his captain, crying "no, no"; but hook was purring to his claw.
""did you say you would go, cecco?"
he said musingly.
cecco went, first flinging his arms despairingly.
there was no more singing, all listened now; and again came a death-screech and again a crow.
no one spoke except slightly.
""three," he said.
hook rallied his dogs with a gesture."
's "death and odds fish," he thundered, "who is to bring me that doodle-doo?"
""wait till cecco comes out," growled starkey, and the others took up the cry.
""i think i heard you volunteer, starkey," said hook, purring again.
""no, by thunder!"
starkey cried.
""my hook thinks you did," said hook, crossing to him.
""i wonder if it would not be advisable, starkey, to humour the hook?"
""i'll swing before i go in there," replied starkey doggedly, and again he had the support of the crew.
""is this mutiny?"
asked hook more pleasantly than ever.
""starkey's ringleader!"
""captain, mercy!"
starkey whimpered, all of a tremble now.
""shake hands, starkey," said hook, proffering his claw.
starkey looked round for help, but all deserted him.
as he backed up hook advanced, and now the red spark was in his eye.
with a despairing scream the pirate leapt upon long tom and precipitated himself into the sea.
""four," said slightly.
""and now," hook said courteously, "did any other gentlemen say mutiny?"
seizing a lantern and raising his claw with a menacing gesture, "i'll bring out that doodle-doo myself," he said, and sped into the cabin.
""five."
how slightly longed to say it.
he wetted his lips to be ready, but hook came staggering out, without his lantern.
""something blew out the light," he said a little unsteadily.
""something!"
echoed mullins.
""what of cecco?"
demanded noodler.
""he's as dead as jukes," said hook shortly.
his reluctance to return to the cabin impressed them all unfavourably, and the mutinous sounds again broke forth.
all pirates are superstitious, and cookson cried, "they do say the surest sign a ship's accurst is when there's one on board more than can be accounted for."
""i've heard," muttered mullins, "he always boards the pirate craft last.
had he a tail, captain?"
""they say," said another, looking viciously at hook, "that when he comes it's in the likeness of the wickedest man aboard."
""had he a hook, captain?"
asked cookson insolently; and one after another took up the cry, "the ship's doomed!"
at this the children could not resist raising a cheer.
hook had well-nigh forgotten his prisoners, but as he swung round on them now his face lit up again.
""lads," he cried to his crew, "now here's a notion.
open the cabin door and drive them in.
let them fight the doodle-doo for their lives.
if they kill him, we're so much the better; if he kills them, we're none the worse."
for the last time his dogs admired hook, and devotedly they did his bidding.
the boys, pretending to struggle, were pushed into the cabin and the door was closed on them.
""now, listen!"
cried hook, and all listened.
but not one dared to face the door.
yes, one, wendy, who all this time had been bound to the mast.
it was for neither a scream nor a crow that she was watching, it was for the reappearance of peter.
she had not long to wait.
in the cabin he had found the thing for which he had gone in search: the key that would free the children of their manacles, and now they all stole forth, armed with such weapons as they could find.
first signing them to hide, peter cut wendy's bonds, and then nothing could have been easier than for them all to fly off together; but one thing barred the way, an oath, "hook or me this time."
so when he had freed wendy, he whispered for her to conceal herself with the others, and himself took her place by the mast, her cloak around him so that he should pass for her.
then he took a great breath and crowed.
to the pirates it was a voice crying that all the boys lay slain in the cabin; and they were panic-stricken.
hook tried to hearten them; but like the dogs he had made them they showed him their fangs, and he knew that if he took his eyes off them now they would leap at him.
""lads," he said, ready to cajole or strike as need be, but never quailing for an instant, "i've thought it out.
there's a jonah aboard."
""ay," they snarled, "a man wi" a hook."
""no, lads, no, it's the girl.
never was luck on a pirate ship wi" a woman on board.
we'll right the ship when she's gone."
some of them remembered that this had been a saying of flint's.
""it's worth trying," they said doubtfully.
""fling the girl overboard," cried hook; and they made a rush at the figure in the cloak.
""there's none can save you now, missy," mullins hissed jeeringly.
""there's one," replied the figure.
""who's that?"
""peter pan the avenger!"
came the terrible answer; and as he spoke peter flung off his cloak.
then they all knew who't was that had been undoing them in the cabin, and twice hook essayed to speak and twice he failed.
in that frightful moment i think his fierce heart broke.
at last he cried, "cleave him to the brisket!"
but without conviction.
""down, boys, and at them!"
peter's voice rang out; and in another moment the clash of arms was resounding through the ship.
had the pirates kept together it is certain that they would have won; but the onset came when they were still unstrung, and they ran hither and thither, striking wildly, each thinking himself the last survivor of the crew.
man to man they were the stronger; but they fought on the defensive only, which enabled the boys to hunt in pairs and choose their quarry.
some of the miscreants leapt into the sea; others hid in dark recesses, where they were found by slightly, who did not fight, but ran about with a lantern which he flashed in their faces, so that they were half blinded and fell as an easy prey to the reeking swords of the other boys.
there was little sound to be heard but the clang of weapons, an occasional screech or splash, and slightly monotonously counting -- five -- six -- seven eight -- nine -- ten -- eleven.
i think all were gone when a group of savage boys surrounded hook, who seemed to have a charmed life, as he kept them at bay in that circle of fire.
they had done for his dogs, but this man alone seemed to be a match for them all.
again and again they closed upon him, and again and again he hewed a clear space.
he had lifted up one boy with his hook, and was using him as a buckler -lsb- shield -rsb-, when another, who had just passed his sword through mullins, sprang into the fray.
""put up your swords, boys," cried the newcomer, "this man is mine."
thus suddenly hook found himself face to face with peter.
the others drew back and formed a ring around them.
for long the two enemies looked at one another, hook shuddering slightly, and peter with the strange smile upon his face.
""so, pan," said hook at last, "this is all your doing."
""ay, james hook," came the stern answer, "it is all my doing."
""proud and insolent youth," said hook, "prepare to meet thy doom."
""dark and sinister man," peter answered, "have at thee."
without more words they fell to, and for a space there was no advantage to either blade.
peter was a superb swordsman, and parried with dazzling rapidity; ever and anon he followed up a feint with a lunge that got past his foe's defence, but his shorter reach stood him in ill stead, and he could not drive the steel home.
hook, scarcely his inferior in brilliancy, but not quite so nimble in wrist play, forced him back by the weight of his onset, hoping suddenly to end all with a favourite thrust, taught him long ago by barbecue at rio; but to his astonishment he found this thrust turned aside again and again.
then he sought to close and give the quietus with his iron hook, which all this time had been pawing the air; but peter doubled under it and, lunging fiercely, pierced him in the ribs.
at the sight of his own blood, whose peculiar colour, you remember, was offensive to him, the sword fell from hook's hand, and he was at peter's mercy.
""now!"
cried all the boys, but with a magnificent gesture peter invited his opponent to pick up his sword.
hook did so instantly, but with a tragic feeling that peter was showing good form.
hitherto he had thought it was some fiend fighting him, but darker suspicions assailed him now.
""pan, who and what art thou?"
he cried huskily.
""i'm youth, i'm joy," peter answered at a venture, "i'm a little bird that has broken out of the egg."
this, of course, was nonsense; but it was proof to the unhappy hook that peter did not know in the least who or what he was, which is the very pinnacle of good form.
""to" t again," he cried despairingly.
he fought now like a human flail, and every sweep of that terrible sword would have severed in twain any man or boy who obstructed it; but peter fluttered round him as if the very wind it made blew him out of the danger zone.
and again and again he darted in and pricked.
hook was fighting now without hope.
that passionate breast no longer asked for life; but for one boon it craved: to see peter show bad form before it was cold forever.
abandoning the fight he rushed into the powder magazine and fired it.
""in two minutes," he cried, "the ship will be blown to pieces."
now, now, he thought, true form will show.
but peter issued from the powder magazine with the shell in his hands, and calmly flung it overboard.
what sort of form was hook himself showing?
misguided man though he was, we may be glad, without sympathising with him, that in the end he was true to the traditions of his race.
the other boys were flying around him now, flouting, scornful; and he staggered about the deck striking up at them impotently, his mind was no longer with them; it was slouching in the playing fields of long ago, or being sent up -lsb- to the headmaster -rsb- for good, or watching the wall-game from a famous wall.
and his shoes were right, and his waistcoat was right, and his tie was right, and his socks were right.
james hook, thou not wholly unheroic figure, farewell.
for we have come to his last moment.
seeing peter slowly advancing upon him through the air with dagger poised, he sprang upon the bulwarks to cast himself into the sea.
he did not know that the crocodile was waiting for him; for we purposely stopped the clock that this knowledge might be spared him: a little mark of respect from us at the end.
he had one last triumph, which i think we need not grudge him.
as he stood on the bulwark looking over his shoulder at peter gliding through the air, he invited him with a gesture to use his foot.
it made peter kick instead of stab.
at last hook had got the boon for which he craved.
""bad form," he cried jeeringly, and went content to the crocodile.
thus perished james hook.
""seventeen," slightly sang out; but he was not quite correct in his figures.
fifteen paid the penalty for their crimes that night; but two reached the shore: starkey to be captured by the redskins, who made him nurse for all their papooses, a melancholy come-down for a pirate; and smee, who henceforth wandered about the world in his spectacles, making a precarious living by saying he was the only man that jas.
hook had feared.
wendy, of course, had stood by taking no part in the fight, though watching peter with glistening eyes; but now that all was over she became prominent again.
she praised them equally, and shuddered delightfully when michael showed her the place where he had killed one; and then she took them into hook's cabin and pointed to his watch which was hanging on a nail.
it said "half-past one!"
the lateness of the hour was almost the biggest thing of all.
she got them to bed in the pirates" bunks pretty quickly, you may be sure; all but peter, who strutted up and down on the deck, until at last he fell asleep by the side of long tom.
he had one of his dreams that night, and cried in his sleep for a long time, and wendy held him tightly.
chapter 16 the return home by three bells that morning they were all stirring their stumps -lsb- legs -rsb-; for there was a big sea running; and tootles, the bo "sun, was among them, with a rope's end in his hand and chewing tobacco.
they all donned pirate clothes cut off at the knee, shaved smartly, and tumbled up, with the true nautical roll and hitching their trousers.
it need not be said who was the captain.
nibs and john were first and second mate.
there was a woman aboard.
the rest were tars -lsb- sailors -rsb- before the mast, and lived in the fo "c "sle.
peter had already lashed himself to the wheel; but he piped all hands and delivered a short address to them; said he hoped they would do their duty like gallant hearties, but that he knew they were the scum of rio and the gold coast, and if they snapped at him he would tear them.
the bluff strident words struck the note sailors understood, and they cheered him lustily.
then a few sharp orders were given, and they turned the ship round, and nosed her for the mainland.
captain pan calculated, after consulting the ship's chart, that if this weather lasted they should strike the azores about the 21st of june, after which it would save time to fly.
some of them wanted it to be an honest ship and others were in favour of keeping it a pirate; but the captain treated them as dogs, and they dared not express their wishes to him even in a round robin -lsb- one person after another, as they had to cpt.
hook -rsb-.
instant obedience was the only safe thing.
slightly got a dozen for looking perplexed when told to take soundings.
the general feeling was that peter was honest just now to lull wendy's suspicions, but that there might be a change when the new suit was ready, which, against her will, she was making for him out of some of hook's wickedest garments.
it was afterwards whispered among them that on the first night he wore this suit he sat long in the cabin with hook's cigar-holder in his mouth and one hand clenched, all but for the forefinger, which he bent and held threateningly aloft like a hook.
instead of watching the ship, however, we must now return to that desolate home from which three of our characters had taken heartless flight so long ago.
it seems a shame to have neglected no. 14 all this time; and yet we may be sure that mrs. darling does not blame us.
if we had returned sooner to look with sorrowful sympathy at her, she would probably have cried, "do n't be silly; what do i matter?
do go back and keep an eye on the children."
so long as mothers are like this their children will take advantage of them; and they may lay to -lsb- bet on -rsb- that.
even now we venture into that familiar nursery only because its lawful occupants are on their way home; we are merely hurrying on in advance of them to see that their beds are properly aired and that mr. and mrs. darling do not go out for the evening.
we are no more than servants.
why on earth should their beds be properly aired, seeing that they left them in such a thankless hurry?
would it not serve them jolly well right if they came back and found that their parents were spending the week-end in the country?
it would be the moral lesson they have been in need of ever since we met them; but if we contrived things in this way mrs. darling would never forgive us.
one thing i should like to do immensely, and that is to tell her, in the way authors have, that the children are coming back, that indeed they will be here on thursday week.
this would spoil so completely the surprise to which wendy and john and michael are looking forward.
they have been planning it out on the ship: mother's rapture, father's shout of joy, nana's leap through the air to embrace them first, when what they ought to be prepared for is a good hiding.
how delicious to spoil it all by breaking the news in advance; so that when they enter grandly mrs. darling may not even offer wendy her mouth, and mr. darling may exclaim pettishly, "dash it all, here are those boys again."
however, we should get no thanks even for this.
we are beginning to know mrs. darling by this time, and may be sure that she would upbraid us for depriving the children of their little pleasure.
""but, my dear madam, it is ten days till thursday week; so that by telling you what's what, we can save you ten days of unhappiness."
""yes, but at what a cost!
by depriving the children of ten minutes of delight."
""oh, if you look at it in that way!"
""what other way is there in which to look at it?"
you see, the woman had no proper spirit.
i had meant to say extraordinarily nice things about her; but i despise her, and not one of them will i say now.
she does not really need to be told to have things ready, for they are ready.
all the beds are aired, and she never leaves the house, and observe, the window is open.
for all the use we are to her, we might well go back to the ship.
however, as we are here we may as well stay and look on.
that is all we are, lookers-on.
nobody really wants us.
so let us watch and say jaggy things, in the hope that some of them will hurt.
the only change to be seen in the night-nursery is that between nine and six the kennel is no longer there.
when the children flew away, mr. darling felt in his bones that all the blame was his for having chained nana up, and that from first to last she had been wiser than he.
of course, as we have seen, he was quite a simple man; indeed he might have passed for a boy again if he had been able to take his baldness off; but he had also a noble sense of justice and a lion's courage to do what seemed right to him; and having thought the matter out with anxious care after the flight of the children, he went down on all fours and crawled into the kennel.
to all mrs. darling's dear invitations to him to come out he replied sadly but firmly: "no, my own one, this is the place for me."
in the bitterness of his remorse he swore that he would never leave the kennel until his children came back.
of course this was a pity; but whatever mr. darling did he had to do in excess, otherwise he soon gave up doing it.
and there never was a more humble man than the once proud george darling, as he sat in the kennel of an evening talking with his wife of their children and all their pretty ways.
very touching was his deference to nana.
he would not let her come into the kennel, but on all other matters he followed her wishes implicitly.
every morning the kennel was carried with mr. darling in it to a cab, which conveyed him to his office, and he returned home in the same way at six.
something of the strength of character of the man will be seen if we remember how sensitive he was to the opinion of neighbours: this man whose every movement now attracted surprised attention.
inwardly he must have suffered torture; but he preserved a calm exterior even when the young criticised his little home, and he always lifted his hat courteously to any lady who looked inside.
it may have been quixotic, but it was magnificent.
soon the inward meaning of it leaked out, and the great heart of the public was touched.
crowds followed the cab, cheering it lustily; charming girls scaled it to get his autograph; interviews appeared in the better class of papers, and society invited him to dinner and added, "do come in the kennel."
on that eventful thursday week, mrs. darling was in the night-nursery awaiting george's return home; a very sad-eyed woman.
now that we look at her closely and remember the gaiety of her in the old days, all gone now just because she has lost her babes, i find i wo n't be able to say nasty things about her after all.
if she was too fond of her rubbishy children, she could n't help it.
look at her in her chair, where she has fallen asleep.
the corner of her mouth, where one looks first, is almost withered up.
her hand moves restlessly on her breast as if she had a pain there.
some like peter best, and some like wendy best, but i like her best.
suppose, to make her happy, we whisper to her in her sleep that the brats are coming back.
they are really within two miles of the window now, and flying strong, but all we need whisper is that they are on the way.
let's.
it is a pity we did it, for she has started up, calling their names; and there is no one in the room but nana.
""o nana, i dreamt my dear ones had come back."
nana had filmy eyes, but all she could do was put her paw gently on her mistress's lap; and they were sitting together thus when the kennel was brought back.
as mr. darling puts his head out to kiss his wife, we see that his face is more worn than of yore, but has a softer expression.
he gave his hat to liza, who took it scornfully; for she had no imagination, and was quite incapable of understanding the motives of such a man.
outside, the crowd who had accompanied the cab home were still cheering, and he was naturally not unmoved.
""listen to them," he said; "it is very gratifying."
""lots of little boys," sneered liza.
""there were several adults to-day," he assured her with a faint flush; but when she tossed her head he had not a word of reproof for her.
social success had not spoilt him; it had made him sweeter.
for some time he sat with his head out of the kennel, talking with mrs. darling of this success, and pressing her hand reassuringly when she said she hoped his head would not be turned by it.
""but if i had been a weak man," he said.
""good heavens, if i had been a weak man!"
""and, george," she said timidly, "you are as full of remorse as ever, are n't you?"
""full of remorse as ever, dearest!
see my punishment: living in a kennel."
""but it is punishment, is n't it, george?
you are sure you are not enjoying it?"
""my love!"
you may be sure she begged his pardon; and then, feeling drowsy, he curled round in the kennel.
""wo n't you play me to sleep," he asked, "on the nursery piano?"
and as she was crossing to the day-nursery he added thoughtlessly, "and shut that window.
i feel a draught."
""o george, never ask me to do that.
the window must always be left open for them, always, always."
now it was his turn to beg her pardon; and she went into the day-nursery and played, and soon he was asleep; and while he slept, wendy and john and michael flew into the room.
oh no.
we have written it so, because that was the charming arrangement planned by them before we left the ship; but something must have happened since then, for it is not they who have flown in, it is peter and tinker bell.
peter's first words tell all.
""quick tink," he whispered, "close the window; bar it!
that's right.
now you and i must get away by the door; and when wendy comes she will think her mother has barred her out; and she will have to go back with me."
now i understand what had hitherto puzzled me, why when peter had exterminated the pirates he did not return to the island and leave tink to escort the children to the mainland.
this trick had been in his head all the time.
instead of feeling that he was behaving badly he danced with glee; then he peeped into the day-nursery to see who was playing.
he whispered to tink, "it's wendy's mother!
she is a pretty lady, but not so pretty as my mother.
her mouth is full of thimbles, but not so full as my mother's was."
of course he knew nothing whatever about his mother; but he sometimes bragged about her.
he did not know the tune, which was "home, sweet home," but he knew it was saying, "come back, wendy, wendy, wendy"; and he cried exultantly, "you will never see wendy again, lady, for the window is barred!"
he peeped in again to see why the music had stopped, and now he saw that mrs. darling had laid her head on the box, and that two tears were sitting on her eyes.
""she wants me to unbar the window," thought peter, "but i wo n't, not i!"
he peeped again, and the tears were still there, or another two had taken their place.
""she's awfully fond of wendy," he said to himself.
he was angry with her now for not seeing why she could not have wendy.
the reason was so simple: "i'm fond of her too.
we ca n't both have her, lady."
but the lady would not make the best of it, and he was unhappy.
he ceased to look at her, but even then she would not let go of him.
he skipped about and made funny faces, but when he stopped it was just as if she were inside him, knocking.
""oh, all right," he said at last, and gulped.
then he unbarred the window.
""come on, tink," he cried, with a frightful sneer at the laws of nature; "we do n't want any silly mothers;" and he flew away.
thus wendy and john and michael found the window open for them after all, which of course was more than they deserved.
they alighted on the floor, quite unashamed of themselves, and the youngest one had already forgotten his home.
""john," he said, looking around him doubtfully, "i think i have been here before."
""of course you have, you silly.
there is your old bed."
""so it is," michael said, but not with much conviction.
""i say," cried john, "the kennel!"
and he dashed across to look into it.
""perhaps nana is inside it," wendy said.
but john whistled.
""hullo," he said, "there's a man inside it."
""it's father!"
exclaimed wendy.
""let me see father," michael begged eagerly, and he took a good look.
""he is not so big as the pirate i killed," he said with such frank disappointment that i am glad mr. darling was asleep; it would have been sad if those had been the first words he heard his little michael say.
wendy and john had been taken aback somewhat at finding their father in the kennel.
""surely," said john, like one who had lost faith in his memory, "he used not to sleep in the kennel?"
""john," wendy said falteringly, "perhaps we do n't remember the old life as well as we thought we did."
a chill fell upon them; and serve them right.
""it is very careless of mother," said that young scoundrel john, "not to be here when we come back."
it was then that mrs. darling began playing again.
""it's mother!"
cried wendy, peeping.
""so it is!"
said john.
""then are you not really our mother, wendy?"
asked michael, who was surely sleepy.
""oh dear!"
exclaimed wendy, with her first real twinge of remorse -lsb- for having gone -rsb-, "it was quite time we came back."
""let us creep in," john suggested, "and put our hands over her eyes."
but wendy, who saw that they must break the joyous news more gently, had a better plan.
""let us all slip into our beds, and be there when she comes in, just as if we had never been away."
and so when mrs. darling went back to the night-nursery to see if her husband was asleep, all the beds were occupied.
the children waited for her cry of joy, but it did not come.
she saw them, but she did not believe they were there.
you see, she saw them in their beds so often in her dreams that she thought this was just the dream hanging around her still.
she sat down in the chair by the fire, where in the old days she had nursed them.
they could not understand this, and a cold fear fell upon all the three of them.
""mother!"
wendy cried.
""that's wendy," she said, but still she was sure it was the dream.
""mother!"
""that's john," she said.
""mother!"
cried michael.
he knew her now.
""that's michael," she said, and she stretched out her arms for the three little selfish children they would never envelop again.
yes, they did, they went round wendy and john and michael, who had slipped out of bed and run to her.
""george, george!"
she cried when she could speak; and mr. darling woke to share her bliss, and nana came rushing in.
there could not have been a lovelier sight; but there was none to see it except a little boy who was staring in at the window.
he had had ecstasies innumerable that other children can never know; but he was looking through the window at the one joy from which he must be for ever barred.
chapter 17 when wendy grew up i hope you want to know what became of the other boys.
they were waiting below to give wendy time to explain about them; and when they had counted five hundred they went up.
they went up by the stair, because they thought this would make a better impression.
they stood in a row in front of mrs. darling, with their hats off, and wishing they were not wearing their pirate clothes.
they said nothing, but their eyes asked her to have them.
they ought to have looked at mr. darling also, but they forgot about him.
of course mrs. darling said at once that she would have them; but mr. darling was curiously depressed, and they saw that he considered six a rather large number.
""i must say," he said to wendy, "that you do n't do things by halves," a grudging remark which the twins thought was pointed at them.
the first twin was the proud one, and he asked, flushing, "do you think we should be too much of a handful, sir?
because, if so, we can go away."
""father!"
wendy cried, shocked; but still the cloud was on him.
he knew he was behaving unworthily, but he could not help it.
""we could lie doubled up," said nibs.
""i always cut their hair myself," said wendy.
""george!"
mrs. darling exclaimed, pained to see her dear one showing himself in such an unfavourable light.
then he burst into tears, and the truth came out.
he was as glad to have them as she was, he said, but he thought they should have asked his consent as well as hers, instead of treating him as a cypher -lsb- zero -rsb- in his own house.
""i do n't think he is a cypher," tootles cried instantly.
""do you think he is a cypher, curly?"
""no, i do n't.
do you think he is a cypher, slightly?"
""rather not.
twin, what do you think?"
it turned out that not one of them thought him a cypher; and he was absurdly gratified, and said he would find space for them all in the drawing-room if they fitted in.
""we'll fit in, sir," they assured him.
""then follow the leader," he cried gaily.
""mind you, i am not sure that we have a drawing-room, but we pretend we have, and it's all the same.
hoop la!"
he went off dancing through the house, and they all cried "hoop la!"
and danced after him, searching for the drawing-room; and i forget whether they found it, but at any rate they found corners, and they all fitted in.
as for peter, he saw wendy once again before he flew away.
he did not exactly come to the window, but he brushed against it in passing so that she could open it if she liked and call to him.
that is what she did.
""hullo, wendy, good-bye," he said.
""oh dear, are you going away?"
""yes."
""you do n't feel, peter," she said falteringly, "that you would like to say anything to my parents about a very sweet subject?"
""no."
""about me, peter?"
""no."
mrs. darling came to the window, for at present she was keeping a sharp eye on wendy.
she told peter that she had adopted all the other boys, and would like to adopt him also.
""would you send me to school?"
he inquired craftily.
""yes."
""and then to an office?"
""i suppose so."
""soon i would be a man?"
""very soon."
""i do n't want to go to school and learn solemn things," he told her passionately.
""i do n't want to be a man.
o wendy's mother, if i was to wake up and feel there was a beard!"
""peter," said wendy the comforter, "i should love you in a beard;" and mrs. darling stretched out her arms to him, but he repulsed her.
""keep back, lady, no one is going to catch me and make me a man."
""but where are you going to live?"
""with tink in the house we built for wendy.
the fairies are to put it high up among the tree tops where they sleep at nights."
""how lovely," cried wendy so longingly that mrs. darling tightened her grip.
""i thought all the fairies were dead," mrs. darling said.
""there are always a lot of young ones," explained wendy, who was now quite an authority, "because you see when a new baby laughs for the first time a new fairy is born, and as there are always new babies there are always new fairies.
they live in nests on the tops of trees; and the mauve ones are boys and the white ones are girls, and the blue ones are just little sillies who are not sure what they are."
""i shall have such fun," said peter, with eye on wendy.
""it will be rather lonely in the evening," she said, "sitting by the fire."
""i shall have tink."
""tink ca n't go a twentieth part of the way round," she reminded him a little tartly.
""sneaky tell-tale!"
tink called out from somewhere round the corner.
""it does n't matter," peter said.
""o peter, you know it matters."
""well, then, come with me to the little house."
""may i, mummy?"
""certainly not.
i have got you home again, and i mean to keep you."
""but he does so need a mother."
""so do you, my love."
""oh, all right," peter said, as if he had asked her from politeness merely; but mrs. darling saw his mouth twitch, and she made this handsome offer: to let wendy go to him for a week every year to do his spring cleaning.
wendy would have preferred a more permanent arrangement; and it seemed to her that spring would be long in coming; but this promise sent peter away quite gay again.
he had no sense of time, and was so full of adventures that all i have told you about him is only a halfpenny-worth of them.
i suppose it was because wendy knew this that her last words to him were these rather plaintive ones: "you wo n't forget me, peter, will you, before spring cleaning time comes?"
of course peter promised; and then he flew away.
he took mrs. darling's kiss with him.
the kiss that had been for no one else, peter took quite easily.
funny.
but she seemed satisfied.
of course all the boys went to school; and most of them got into class iii, but slightly was put first into class iv and then into class v. class i is the top class.
before they had attended school a week they saw what goats they had been not to remain on the island; but it was too late now, and soon they settled down to being as ordinary as you or me or jenkins minor -lsb- the younger jenkins -rsb-.
it is sad to have to say that the power to fly gradually left them.
at first nana tied their feet to the bed-posts so that they should not fly away in the night; and one of their diversions by day was to pretend to fall off buses -lsb- the english double-deckers -rsb-; but by and by they ceased to tug at their bonds in bed, and found that they hurt themselves when they let go of the bus.
in time they could not even fly after their hats.
want of practice, they called it; but what it really meant was that they no longer believed.
michael believed longer than the other boys, though they jeered at him; so he was with wendy when peter came for her at the end of the first year.
she flew away with peter in the frock she had woven from leaves and berries in the neverland, and her one fear was that he might notice how short it had become; but he never noticed, he had so much to say about himself.
she had looked forward to thrilling talks with him about old times, but new adventures had crowded the old ones from his mind.
""who is captain hook?"
he asked with interest when she spoke of the arch enemy.
""do n't you remember," she asked, amazed, "how you killed him and saved all our lives?"
""i forget them after i kill them," he replied carelessly.
when she expressed a doubtful hope that tinker bell would be glad to see her he said, "who is tinker bell?"
""o peter," she said, shocked; but even when she explained he could not remember.
""there are such a lot of them," he said.
""i expect she is no more."
i expect he was right, for fairies do n't live long, but they are so little that a short time seems a good while to them.
wendy was pained too to find that the past year was but as yesterday to peter; it had seemed such a long year of waiting to her.
but he was exactly as fascinating as ever, and they had a lovely spring cleaning in the little house on the tree tops.
next year he did not come for her.
she waited in a new frock because the old one simply would not meet; but he never came.
""perhaps he is ill," michael said.
""you know he is never ill."
michael came close to her and whispered, with a shiver, "perhaps there is no such person, wendy!"
and then wendy would have cried if michael had not been crying.
peter came next spring cleaning; and the strange thing was that he never knew he had missed a year.
that was the last time the girl wendy ever saw him.
for a little longer she tried for his sake not to have growing pains; and she felt she was untrue to him when she got a prize for general knowledge.
but the years came and went without bringing the careless boy; and when they met again wendy was a married woman, and peter was no more to her than a little dust in the box in which she had kept her toys.
wendy was grown up.
you need not be sorry for her.
she was one of the kind that likes to grow up.
in the end she grew up of her own free will a day quicker than other girls.
all the boys were grown up and done for by this time; so it is scarcely worth while saying anything more about them.
you may see the twins and nibs and curly any day going to an office, each carrying a little bag and an umbrella.
michael is an engine-driver -lsb- train engineer -rsb-.
slightly married a lady of title, and so he became a lord.
you see that judge in a wig coming out at the iron door?
that used to be tootles.
the bearded man who does n't know any story to tell his children was once john.
wendy was married in white with a pink sash.
it is strange to think that peter did not alight in the church and forbid the banns -lsb- formal announcement of a marriage -rsb-.
years rolled on again, and wendy had a daughter.
this ought not to be written in ink but in a golden splash.
she was called jane, and always had an odd inquiring look, as if from the moment she arrived on the mainland she wanted to ask questions.
when she was old enough to ask them they were mostly about peter pan.
she loved to hear of peter, and wendy told her all she could remember in the very nursery from which the famous flight had taken place.
it was jane's nursery now, for her father had bought it at the three per cents -lsb- mortgage rate -rsb- from wendy's father, who was no longer fond of stairs.
mrs. darling was now dead and forgotten.
there were only two beds in the nursery now, jane's and her nurse's; and there was no kennel, for nana also had passed away.
she died of old age, and at the end she had been rather difficult to get on with; being very firmly convinced that no one knew how to look after children except herself.
once a week jane's nurse had her evening off; and then it was wendy's part to put jane to bed.
that was the time for stories.
it was jane's invention to raise the sheet over her mother's head and her own, thus making a tent, and in the awful darkness to whisper: "what do we see now?"
""i do n't think i see anything to-night," says wendy, with a feeling that if nana were here she would object to further conversation.
""yes, you do," says jane, "you see when you were a little girl."
""that is a long time ago, sweetheart," says wendy.
""ah me, how time flies!"
""does it fly," asks the artful child, "the way you flew when you were a little girl?"
""the way i flew?
do you know, jane, i sometimes wonder whether i ever did really fly."
""yes, you did."
""the dear old days when i could fly!"
""why ca n't you fly now, mother?"
""because i am grown up, dearest.
when people grow up they forget the way."
""why do they forget the way?"
""because they are no longer gay and innocent and heartless.
it is only the gay and innocent and heartless who can fly."
""what is gay and innocent and heartless?
i do wish i were gay and innocent and heartless."
or perhaps wendy admits she does see something.
""i do believe," she says, "that it is this nursery."
""i do believe it is," says jane.
""go on."
they are now embarked on the great adventure of the night when peter flew in looking for his shadow.
""the foolish fellow," says wendy, "tried to stick it on with soap, and when he could not he cried, and that woke me, and i sewed it on for him."
""you have missed a bit," interrupts jane, who now knows the story better than her mother.
""when you saw him sitting on the floor crying, what did you say?"
""i sat up in bed and i said, "boy, why are you crying?""
""yes, that was it," says jane, with a big breath.
""and then he flew us all away to the neverland and the fairies and the pirates and the redskins and the mermaid's lagoon, and the home under the ground, and the little house."
""yes!
which did you like best of all?"
""i think i liked the home under the ground best of all."
""yes, so do i.
what was the last thing peter ever said to you?"
""the last thing he ever said to me was, "just always be waiting for me, and then some night you will hear me crowing.""
""yes."
""but, alas, he forgot all about me," wendy said it with a smile.
she was as grown up as that.
""what did his crow sound like?"
jane asked one evening.
""it was like this," wendy said, trying to imitate peter's crow.
""no, it was n't," jane said gravely, "it was like this;" and she did it ever so much better than her mother.
wendy was a little startled.
""my darling, how can you know?"
""i often hear it when i am sleeping," jane said.
""ah yes, many girls hear it when they are sleeping, but i was the only one who heard it awake."
""lucky you," said jane.
and then one night came the tragedy.
it was the spring of the year, and the story had been told for the night, and jane was now asleep in her bed.
wendy was sitting on the floor, very close to the fire, so as to see to darn, for there was no other light in the nursery; and while she sat darning she heard a crow.
then the window blew open as of old, and peter dropped in on the floor.
he was exactly the same as ever, and wendy saw at once that he still had all his first teeth.
he was a little boy, and she was grown up.
she huddled by the fire not daring to move, helpless and guilty, a big woman.
""hullo, wendy," he said, not noticing any difference, for he was thinking chiefly of himself; and in the dim light her white dress might have been the nightgown in which he had seen her first.
""hullo, peter," she replied faintly, squeezing herself as small as possible.
something inside her was crying "woman, woman, let go of me."
""hullo, where is john?"
he asked, suddenly missing the third bed.
""john is not here now," she gasped.
""is michael asleep?"
he asked, with a careless glance at jane.
""yes," she answered; and now she felt that she was untrue to jane as well as to peter.
""that is not michael," she said quickly, lest a judgment should fall on her.
peter looked.
""hullo, is it a new one?"
""yes."
""boy or girl?"
""girl."
now surely he would understand; but not a bit of it.
""peter," she said, faltering, "are you expecting me to fly away with you?"
""of course; that is why i have come."
he added a little sternly, "have you forgotten that this is spring cleaning time?"
she knew it was useless to say that he had let many spring cleaning times pass.
""i ca n't come," she said apologetically, "i have forgotten how to fly."
""i'll soon teach you again."
""o peter, do n't waste the fairy dust on me."
she had risen; and now at last a fear assailed him.
""what is it?"
he cried, shrinking.
""i will turn up the light," she said, "and then you can see for yourself."
for almost the only time in his life that i know of, peter was afraid.
""do n't turn up the light," he cried.
she let her hands play in the hair of the tragic boy.
she was not a little girl heart-broken about him; she was a grown woman smiling at it all, but they were wet eyed smiles.
then she turned up the light, and peter saw.
he gave a cry of pain; and when the tall beautiful creature stooped to lift him in her arms he drew back sharply.
""what is it?"
he cried again.
she had to tell him.
""i am old, peter.
i am ever so much more than twenty.
i grew up long ago."
""you promised not to!"
""i could n't help it.
i am a married woman, peter."
""no, you're not."
""yes, and the little girl in the bed is my baby."
""no, she's not."
but he supposed she was; and he took a step towards the sleeping child with his dagger upraised.
of course he did not strike.
he sat down on the floor instead and sobbed; and wendy did not know how to comfort him, though she could have done it so easily once.
she was only a woman now, and she ran out of the room to try to think.
peter continued to cry, and soon his sobs woke jane.
she sat up in bed, and was interested at once.
""boy," she said, "why are you crying?"
peter rose and bowed to her, and she bowed to him from the bed.
""hullo," he said.
""hullo," said jane.
""my name is peter pan," he told her.
""yes, i know."
""i came back for my mother," he explained, "to take her to the neverland."
""yes, i know," jane said, "i have been waiting for you."
when wendy returned diffidently she found peter sitting on the bed-post crowing gloriously, while jane in her nighty was flying round the room in solemn ecstasy.
""she is my mother," peter explained; and jane descended and stood by his side, with the look in her face that he liked to see on ladies when they gazed at him.
""he does so need a mother," jane said.
""yes, i know."
wendy admitted rather forlornly; "no one knows it so well as i." "good-bye," said peter to wendy; and he rose in the air, and the shameless jane rose with him; it was already her easiest way of moving about.
wendy rushed to the window.
""no, no," she cried.
""it is just for spring cleaning time," jane said, "he wants me always to do his spring cleaning."
""if only i could go with you," wendy sighed.
""you see you ca n't fly," said jane.
of course in the end wendy let them fly away together.
our last glimpse of her shows her at the window, watching them receding into the sky until they were as small as stars.
as you look at wendy, you may see her hair becoming white, and her figure little again, for all this happened long ago.
jane is now a common grown-up, with a daughter called margaret; and every spring cleaning time, except when he forgets, peter comes for margaret and takes her to the neverland, where she tells him stories about himself, to which he listens eagerly.
when margaret grows up she will have a daughter, who is to be peter's mother in turn; and thus it will go on, so long as children are gay and innocent and heartless.
_book_title_: james_matthew_barrie___peter_pan_in_kensington_gardens,_version_1.txt.out
i the grand tour of the gardens you must see for yourselves that it will be difficult to follow peter pan's adventures unless you are familiar with the kensington gardens.
they are in london, where the king lives, and i used to take david there nearly every day unless he was looking decidedly flushed.
no child has ever been in the whole of the gardens, because it is so soon time to turn back.
the reason it is soon time to turn back is that, if you are as small as david, you sleep from twelve to one.
if your mother was not so sure that you sleep from twelve to one, you could most likely see the whole of them.
the gardens are bounded on one side by a never-ending line of omnibuses, over which your nurse has such authority that if she holds up her finger to any one of them it stops immediately.
she then crosses with you in safety to the other side.
there are more gates to the gardens than one gate, but that is the one you go in at, and before you go in you speak to the lady with the balloons, who sits just outside.
this is as near to being inside as she may venture, because, if she were to let go her hold of the railings for one moment, the balloons would lift her up, and she would be flown away.
she sits very squat, for the balloons are always tugging at her, and the strain has given her quite a red face.
once she was a new one, because the old one had let go, and david was very sorry for the old one, but as she did let go, he wished he had been there to see.
-lsb- illustration: the hump, which is the part of the broad walk where all the big races are run -rsb- the gardens are a tremendous big place, with millions and hundreds of trees; and first you come to the figs, but you scorn to loiter there, for the figs is the resort of superior little persons, who are forbidden to mix with the commonalty, and is so named, according to legend, because they dress in full fig.
these dainty ones are themselves contemptuously called figs by david and other heroes, and you have a key to the manners and customs of this dandiacal section of the gardens when i tell you that cricket is called crickets here.
occasionally a rebel fig climbs over the fence into the world, and such a one was miss mabel grey, of whom i shall tell you when we come to miss mabel grey's gate.
she was the only really celebrated fig.
we are now in the broad walk, and it is as much bigger than the other walks as your father is bigger than you.
david wondered if it began little, and grew and grew, until it was quite grown up, and whether the other walks are its babies, and he drew a picture, which diverted him very much, of the broad walk giving a tiny walk an airing in a perambulator.
in the broad walk you meet all the people who are worth knowing, and there is usually a grown-up with them to prevent them going on the damp grass, and to make them stand disgraced at the corner of a seat if they have been mad-dog or mary-annish.
to be mary-annish is to behave like a girl, whimpering because nurse wo n't carry you, or simpering with your thumb in your mouth, and it is a hateful quality; but to be mad-dog is to kick out at everything, and there is some satisfaction in that.
if i were to point out all the notable places as we pass up the broad walk, it would be time to turn back before we reach them, and i simply wave my stick at cecco hewlett's tree, that memorable spot where a boy called cecco lost his penny, and, looking for it, found twopence.
there has been a good deal of excavation going on there ever since.
farther up the walk is the little wooden house in which marmaduke perry hid.
there is no more awful story of the gardens than this of marmaduke perry, who had been mary-annish three days in succession, and was sentenced to appear in the broad walk dressed in his sister's clothes.
he hid in the little wooden house, and refused to emerge until they brought him knickerbockers with pockets.
you now try to go to the round pond, but nurses hate it, because they are not really manly, and they make you look the other way, at the big penny and the baby's palace.
she was the most celebrated baby of the gardens, and lived in the palace all alone, with ever so many dolls, so people rang the bell, and up she got out of her bed, though it was past six o'clock, and she lighted a candle and opened the door in her nighty, and then they all cried with great rejoicings, "hail, queen of england!"
what puzzled david most was how she knew where the matches were kept.
the big penny is a statue about her.
next we come to the hump, which is the part of the broad walk where all the big races are run; and even though you had no intention of running you do run when you come to the hump, it is such a fascinating, slide-down kind of place.
often you stop when you have run about half-way down it, and then you are lost; but there is another little wooden house near here, called the lost house, and so you tell the man that you are lost and then he finds you.
it is glorious fun racing down the hump, but you ca n't do it on windy days because then you are not there, but the fallen leaves do it instead of you.
there is almost nothing that has such a keen sense of fun as a fallen leaf.
from the hump we can see the gate that is called after miss mabel grey, the fig i promised to tell you about.
there were always two nurses with her, or else one mother and one nurse, and for a long time she was a pattern-child who always coughed off the table and said, "how do you do?"
to the other figs, and the only game she played at was flinging a ball gracefully and letting the nurse bring it back to her.
then one day she tired of it all and went mad-dog, and, first, to show that she really was mad-dog, she unloosened both her boot-laces and put out her tongue east, west, north, and south.
she then flung her sash into a puddle and danced on it till dirty water was squirted over her frock, after which she climbed the fence and had a series of incredible adventures, one of the least of which was that she kicked off both her boots.
at last she came to the gate that is now called after her, out of which she ran into streets david and i have never been in though we have heard them roaring, and still she ran on and would never again have been heard of had not her mother jumped into a "bus and thus overtaken her.
it all happened, i should say, long ago, and this is not the mabel grey whom david knows.
-lsb- illustration: there is almost nothing that has such a keen sense of fun as a fallen leaf -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- returning up the broad walk we have on our right the baby walk, which is so full of perambulators that you could cross from side to side stepping on babies, but the nurses wo n't let you do it.
from this walk a passage called bunting's thumb, because it is that length, leads into picnic street, where there are real kettles, and chestnut-blossom falls into your mug as you are drinking.
quite common children picnic here also, and the blossom falls into their mugs just the same.
next comes st. govor's well, which was full of water when malcolm the bold fell into it.
he was his mother's favourite, and he let her put her arm round his neck in public because she was a widow; but he was also partial to adventures, and liked to play with a chimney-sweep who had killed a good many bears.
the sweep's name was sooty, and one day, when they were playing near the well, malcolm fell in and would have been drowned had not sooty dived in and rescued him; and the water had washed sooty clean, and he now stood revealed as malcolm's long-lost father.
so malcolm would not let his mother put her arm round his neck any more.
between the well and the round pond are the cricket pitches, and frequently the choosing of sides exhausts so much time that there is scarcely any cricket.
everybody wants to bat first, and as soon as he is out he bowls unless you are the better wrestler, and while you are wrestling with him the fielders have scattered to play at something else.
the gardens are noted for two kinds of cricket: boy cricket, which is real cricket with a bat, and girl cricket, which is with a racquet and the governess.
girls ca n't really play cricket, and when you are watching their futile efforts you make funny sounds at them.
nevertheless, there was a very disagreeable incident one day when some forward girls challenged david's team, and a disturbing creature called angela clare sent down so many yorkers that -- however, instead of telling you the result of that regrettable match i shall pass on hurriedly to the round pond, which is the wheel that keeps all the gardens going.
-lsb- illustration: the serpentine is a lovely lake, and there is a drowned forest at the bottom of it.
if you peer over the edge you can see the trees all growing upside down, and they say that at night there are also drowned stars in it -rsb- it is round because it is in the very middle of the gardens, and when you are come to it you never want to go any farther.
you ca n't be good all the time at the round pond, however much you try.
you can be good in the broad walk all the time, but not at the round pond, and the reason is that you forget, and, when you remember, you are so wet that you may as well be wetter.
there are men who sail boats on the round pond, such big boats that they bring them in barrows, and sometimes in perambulators, and then the baby has to walk.
the bow-legged children in the gardens are those who had to walk too soon because their father needed the perambulator.
you always want to have a yacht to sail on the round pond, and in the end your uncle gives you one; and to carry it to the pond the first day is splendid, also to talk about it to boys who have no uncle is splendid, but soon you like to leave it at home.
for the sweetest craft that slips her moorings in the round pond is what is called a stick-boat, because she is rather like a stick until she is in the water and you are holding the string.
then as you walk round, pulling her, you see little men running about her deck, and sails rise magically and catch the breeze, and you put in on dirty nights at snug harbours which are unknown to the lordly yachts.
night passes in a twink, and again your rakish craft noses for the wind, whales spout, you glide over buried cities, and have brushes with pirates, and cast anchor on coral isles.
you are a solitary boy while all this is taking place, for two boys together can not adventure far upon the round pond, and though you may talk to yourself throughout the voyage, giving orders and executing them with despatch, you know not, when it is time to go home, where you have been or what swelled your sails; your treasure-trove is all locked away in your hold, so to speak, which will be opened, perhaps, by another little boy many years afterwards.
but those yachts have nothing in their hold.
does any one return to this haunt of his youth because of the yachts that used to sail it?
oh no.
it is the stick-boat that is freighted with memories.
the yachts are toys, their owner a fresh-water mariner; they can cross and recross a pond only while the stick-boat goes to sea.
you yachtsmen with your wands, who think we are all there to gaze on you, your ships are only accidents of this place, and were they all to be boarded and sunk by the ducks, the real business of the round pond would be carried on as usual.
-lsb- illustration: the island on which all the birds are born that become baby boys and girls -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- paths from everywhere crowd like children to the pond.
some of them are ordinary paths, which have a rail on each side, and are made by men with their coats off, but others are vagrants, wide at one spot, and at another so narrow that you can stand astride them.
they are called paths that have made themselves, and david did wish he could see them doing it.
but, like all the most wonderful things that happen in the gardens, it is done, we concluded, at night after the gates are closed.
we have also decided that the paths make themselves because it is their only chance of getting to the round pond.
one of these gypsy paths comes from the place where the sheep get their hair cut.
when david shed his curls at the hairdresser's, i am told, he said good-bye to them without a tremor, though his mother has never been quite the same bright creature since; so he despises the sheep as they run from their shearer, and calls out tauntingly, "cowardly, cowardly custard!"
but when the man grips them between his legs david shakes a fist at him for using such big scissors.
another startling moment is when the man turns back the grimy wool from the sheep's shoulders and they look suddenly like ladies in the stalls of a theatre.
the sheep are so frightened by the shearing that it makes them quite white and thin, and as soon as they are set free they begin to nibble the grass at once, quite anxiously, as if they feared that they would never be worth eating.
david wonders whether they know each other, now that they are so different, and if it makes them fight with the wrong ones.
they are great fighters, and thus so unlike country sheep that every year they give my st. bernard dog, porthos, a shock.
he can make a field of country sheep fly by merely announcing his approach, but these town sheep come toward him with no promise of gentle entertainment, and then a light from last year breaks upon porthos.
he can not with dignity retreat, but he stops and looks about him as if lost in admiration of the scenery, and presently he strolls away with a fine indifference and a glint at me from the corner of his eye.
-lsb- illustration: porthos -rsb- the serpentine begins near here.
it is a lovely lake, and there is a drowned forest at the bottom of it.
if you peer over the edge you can see the trees all growing upside down, and they say that at night there are also drowned stars in it.
if so, peter pan sees them when he is sailing across the lake in the thrush's nest.
a small part only of the serpentine is in the gardens, for soon it passes beneath a bridge to far away where the island is on which all the birds are born that become baby boys and girls.
no one who is human, except peter pan -lrb- and he is only half human -rrb-, can land on the island, but you may write what you want -lrb- boy or girl, dark or fair -rrb- on a piece of paper, and then twist it into the shape of a boat and slip it into the water, and it reaches peter pan's island after dark.
-lsb- illustration: one of the paths that have made themselves -rsb- we are on the way home now, though of course, it is all pretence that we can go to so many of the places in one day.
i should have had to be carrying david long ago, and resting on every seat like old mr. salford.
that was what we called him, because he always talked to us of a lovely place called salford where he had been born.
he was a crab-apple of an old gentleman who wandered all day in the gardens from seat to seat trying to fall in with somebody who was acquainted with the town of salford, and when we had known him for a year or more we actually did meet another aged solitary who had once spent saturday to monday in salford.
he was meek and timid, and carried his address inside his hat, and whatever part of london he was in search of he always went to westminster abbey first as a starting-point.
him we carried in triumph to our other friend, with the story of that saturday to monday, and never shall i forget the gloating joy with which mr. salford leapt at him.
they have been cronies ever since, and i notice that mr. salford, who naturally does most of the talking, keeps tight grip of the other old man's coat.
-lsb- illustration: old mr. salford was a crab-apple of an old gentleman who wandered all day in the gardens -rsb- -lsb- illustration: away he flew, right over the houses to the gardens -rsb- the two last places before you come to our gate are the dogs" cemetery and the chaffinch's nest, but we pretend not to know what the dogs" cemetery is, as porthos is always with us.
the nest is very sad.
it is quite white, and the way we found it was wonderful.
we were having another look among the bushes for david's lost worsted ball, and instead of the ball we found a lovely nest made of the worsted, and containing four eggs, with scratches on them very like david's handwriting, so we think they must have been the mother's love-letters to the little ones inside.
every day we were in the gardens we paid a call at the nest, taking care that no cruel boy should see us, and we dropped crumbs, and soon the bird knew us as friends, and sat in the nest looking at us kindly with her shoulders hunched up.
but one day when we went there were only two eggs in the nest, and the next time there were none.
the saddest part of it was that the poor little chaffinch fluttered about the bushes, looking so reproachfully at us that we knew she thought we had done it; and though david tried to explain to her, it was so long since he had spoken the bird language that i fear she did not understand.
he and i left the gardens that day with our knuckles in our eyes.
-lsb- illustration: tailpiece to "the grand tour of the gardens" -rsb- -lsb- illustration: headpiece to "peter pan" -rsb- ii peter pan if you ask your mother whether she knew about peter pan when she was a little girl, she will say, "why, of course i did, child"; and if you ask her whether he rode on a goat in those days, she will say, "what a foolish question to ask; certainly he did."
then if you ask your grandmother whether she knew about peter pan when she was a girl, she also says, "why, of course i did, child," but if you ask her whether he rode on a goat in those days, she says she never heard of his having a goat.
perhaps she has forgotten, just as she sometimes forgets your name and calls you mildred, which is your mother's name.
still, she could hardly forget such an important thing as the goat.
therefore there was no goat when your grandmother was a little girl.
this shows that, in telling the story of peter pan, to begin with the goat -lrb- as most people do -rrb- is as silly as to put on your jacket before your vest.
of course, it also shows that peter is ever so old, but he is really always the same age, so that does not matter in the least.
his age is one week, and though he was born so long ago he has never had a birthday, nor is there the slightest chance of his ever having one.
the reason is that he escaped from being a human when he was seven days old; he escaped by the window and flew back to the kensington gardens.
if you think he was the only baby who ever wanted to escape, it shows how completely you have forgotten your own young days.
when david heard this story first he was quite certain that he had never tried to escape, but i told him to think back hard, pressing his hands to his temples, and when he had done this hard, and even harder, he distinctly remembered a youthful desire to return to the tree-tops, and with that memory came others, as that he had lain in bed planning to escape as soon as his mother was asleep, and how she had once caught him half-way up the chimney.
all children could have such recollections if they would press their hands hard to their temples, for, having been birds before they were human, they are naturally a little wild during the first few weeks, and very itchy at the shoulders, where their wings used to be.
so david tells me.
-lsb- illustration: the fairies have their tiffs with the birds -rsb- i ought to mention here that the following is our way with a story: first i tell it to him, and then he tells it to me, the understanding being that it is quite a different story; and then i retell it with his additions, and so we go on until no one could say whether it is more his story or mine.
in this story of peter pan, for instance, the bald narrative and most of the moral reflections are mine, though not all, for this boy can be a stern moralist; but the interesting bits about the ways and customs of babies in the bird-stage are mostly reminiscences of david's, recalled by pressing his hands to his temples and thinking hard.
well, peter pan got out by the window, which had no bars.
standing on the ledge he could see trees far away, which were doubtless the kensington gardens, and the moment he saw them he entirely forgot that he was now a little boy in a nightgown, and away he flew, right over the houses to the gardens.
it is wonderful that he could fly without wings, but the place itched tremendously, and -- and -- perhaps we could all fly if we were as dead-confident-sure of our capacity to do it as was bold peter pan that evening.
he alighted gaily on the open sward, between the baby's palace and the serpentine, and the first thing he did was to lie on his back and kick.
he was quite unaware already that he had ever been human, and thought he was a bird, even in appearance, just the same as in his early days, and when he tried to catch a fly he did not understand that the reason he missed it was because he had attempted to seize it with his hand, which, of course, a bird never does.
he saw, however, that it must be past lock-out time, for there were a good many fairies about, all too busy to notice him; they were getting breakfast ready, milking their cows, drawing water, and so on, and the sight of the water-pails made him thirsty, so he flew over to the round pond to have a drink.
he stooped and dipped his beak in the pond; he thought it was his beak, but, of course, it was only his nose, and therefore, very little water came up, and that not so refreshing as usual, so next he tried a puddle and he fell flop into it.
when a real bird falls in flop, he spreads out his feathers and pecks them dry, but peter could not remember what was the thing to do, and he decided rather sulkily to go to sleep on the weeping-beech in the baby walk.
at first he found some difficulty in balancing himself on a branch, but presently he remembered the way, and fell asleep.
he awoke long before morning, shivering, and saying to himself," i never was out on such a cold night"; he had really been out on colder nights when he was a bird, but, of course, as everybody knows, what seems a warm night to a bird is a cold night to a boy in a nightgown.
peter also felt strangely uncomfortable, as if his head was stuffy; he heard loud noises that made him look round sharply, though they were really himself sneezing.
there was something he wanted very much, but, though he knew he wanted it, he could not think what it was.
what he wanted so much was his mother to blow his nose, but that never struck him, so he decided to appeal to the fairies for enlightenment.
they are reputed to know a good deal.
-lsb- illustration: when he heard peter's voice he popped in alarm behind a tulip -rsb- there were two of them strolling along the baby walk, with their arms round each other's waists, and he hopped down to address them.
the fairies have their tiffs with the birds, but they usually give a civil answer to a civil question, and he was quite angry when these two ran away the moment they saw him.
another was lolling on a garden chair, reading a postage-stamp which some human had let fall, and when he heard peter's voice he popped in alarm behind a tulip.
to peter's bewilderment he discovered that every fairy he met fled from him.
a band of workmen, who were sawing down a toadstool, rushed away, leaving their tools behind them.
a milkmaid turned her pail upside down and hid in it.
soon the gardens were in an uproar.
crowds of fairies were running this way and that, asking each other stoutly who was afraid; lights were extinguished, doors barricaded, and from the grounds of queen mab's palace came the rub-a-dub of drums, showing that the royal guard had been called out.
a regiment of lancers came charging down the broad walk, armed with holly-leaves, with which they jag the enemy horribly in passing.
peter heard the little people crying everywhere that there was a human in the gardens after lock-out time, but he never thought for a moment that he was the human.
he was feeling stuffier and stuffier, and more and more wistful to learn what he wanted done to his nose, but he pursued them with the vital question in vain; the timid creatures ran from him, and even the lancers, when he approached them up the hump, turned swiftly into a side-walk, on the pretence that they saw him there.
-lsb- illustration: a band of workmen, who were sawing down a toadstool, rushed away, leaving their tools behind them -rsb- despairing of the fairies, he resolved to consult the birds, but now he remembered, as an odd thing, that all the birds on the weeping-beech had flown away when he alighted on it, and though this had not troubled him at the time, he saw its meaning now.
every living thing was shunning him.
poor little peter pan!
he sat down and cried, and even then he did not know that, for a bird, he was sitting on his wrong part.
it is a blessing that he did not know, for otherwise he would have lost faith in his power to fly, and the moment you doubt whether you can fly, you cease for ever to be able to do it.
the reason birds can fly and we ca n't is simply that they have perfect faith, for to have faith is to have wings.
now, except by flying, no one can reach the island in the serpentine, for the boats of humans are forbidden to land there, and there are stakes round it, standing up in the water, on each of which a bird-sentinel sits by day and night.
it was to the island that peter now flew to put his strange case before old solomon caw, and he alighted on it with relief, much heartened to find himself at last at home, as the birds call the island.
all of them were asleep, including the sentinels, except solomon, who was wide awake on one side, and he listened quietly to peter's adventures, and then told him their true meaning.
"look at your nightgown, if you do n't believe me," solomon said; and with staring eyes peter looked at his nightgown, and then at the sleeping birds.
not one of them wore anything.
"how many of your toes are thumbs?"
said solomon a little cruelly, and peter saw, to his consternation, that all his toes were fingers.
the shock was so great that it drove away his cold.
"ruffle your feathers," said that grim old solomon, and peter tried most desperately hard to ruffle his feathers, but he had none.
then he rose up, quaking, and for the first time since he stood on the window ledge, he remembered a lady who had been very fond of him.
-lsb- illustration: put his strange case before old solomon caw -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb-" i think i shall go back to mother," he said, timidly.
"good-bye," replied solomon caw with a queer look.
but peter hesitated.
"why do n't you go?"
the old one asked politely."
i suppose," said peter huskily," i suppose i can still fly?"
you see he had lost faith.
"poor little half-and-half!"
said solomon, who was not really hard-hearted, "you will never be able to fly again, not even on windy days.
you must live here on the island always."
"and never even go to the kensington gardens?"
peter asked tragically.
"how could you get across?"
said solomon.
he promised very kindly, however, to teach peter as many of the bird ways as could be learned by one of such an awkward shape.
"then i sha n't be exactly a human?"
peter asked.
"no."
"nor exactly a bird?"
"no."
"what shall i be?"
"you will be a betwixt-and-between," solomon said, and certainly he was a wise old fellow, for that is exactly how it turned out.
the birds on the island never got used to him.
his oddities tickled them every day, as if they were quite new, though it was really the birds that were new.
they came out of the eggs daily, and laughed at him at once; then off they soon flew to be humans, and other birds came out of other eggs; and so it went on for ever.
the crafty mother-birds, when they tired of sitting on their eggs, used to get the young ones to break their shells a day before the right time by whispering to them that now was their chance to see peter washing or drinking or eating.
thousands gathered round him daily to watch him do these things, just as you watch the peacocks, and they screamed with delight when he lifted the crusts they flung him with his hands instead of in the usual way with the mouth.
all his food was brought to him from the gardens at solomon's orders by the birds.
he would not eat worms or insects -lrb- which they thought very silly of him -rrb-, so they brought him bread in their beaks.
thus, when you cry out, "greedy!
greedy!"
to the bird that flies away with the big crust, you know now that you ought not to do this, for he is very likely taking it to peter pan.
-lsb- illustration: the birds on the island never got used to him.
his oddities tickled them every day -rsb- peter wore no nightgown now.
you see, the birds were always begging him for bits of it to line their nests with, and, being very good-natured, he could not refuse, so by solomon's advice he had hidden what was left of it.
but, though he was now quite naked, you must not think that he was cold or unhappy.
he was usually very happy and gay, and the reason was that solomon had kept his promise and taught him many of the bird ways.
to be easily pleased, for instance, and always to be really doing something, and to think that whatever he was doing was a thing of vast importance.
peter became very clever at helping the birds to build their nests; soon he could build better than a wood-pigeon, and nearly as well as a blackbird, though never did he satisfy the finches, and he made nice little water-troughs near the nests and dug up worms for the young ones with his fingers.
he also became very learned in bird-lore, and knew an east wind from a west wind by its smell, and he could see the grass growing and hear the insects walking about inside the tree-trunks.
but the best thing solomon had done was to teach him to have a glad heart.
all birds have glad hearts unless you rob their nests, and so, as they were the only kind of heart solomon knew about, it was easy to him to teach peter how to have one.
-lsb- illustration: peter screamed out, "do it again!"
and with great good-nature they did it several times -rsb- peter's heart was so glad that he felt he must sing all day long, just as the birds sing for joy, but, being partly human, he needed an instrument, so he made a pipe of reeds, and he used to sit by the shore of the island of an evening, practising the sough of the wind and the ripple of the water, and catching handfuls of the shine of the moon, and he put them all in his pipe and played them so beautifully that even the birds were deceived, and they would say to each other, "was that a fish leaping in the water or was it peter playing leaping fish on his pipe?"
and sometimes he played the birth of birds, and then the mothers would turn round in their nests to see whether they had laid an egg.
if you are a child of the gardens you must know the chestnut-tree near the bridge, which comes out in flower first of all the chestnuts, but perhaps you have not heard why this tree leads the way.
it is because peter wearies for summer and plays that it has come, and the chestnut being so near, hears him and is cheated.
-lsb- illustration: a hundred flew off with the string, and peter clung to the tail -rsb- but as peter sat by the shore tootling divinely on his pipe he sometimes fell into sad thoughts, and then the music became sad also, and the reason of all this sadness was that he could not reach the gardens, though he could see them through the arch of the bridge.
he knew he could never be a real human again, and scarcely wanted to be one, but oh!
how he longed to play as other children play, and of course there is no such lovely place to play in as the gardens.
the birds brought him news of how boys and girls play, and wistful tears started in peter's eyes.
perhaps you wonder why he did not swim across.
the reason was that he could not swim.
he wanted to know how to swim, but no one on the island knew the way except the ducks, and they are so stupid.
they were quite willing to teach him, but all they could say about it was, "you sit down on the top of the water in this way, and then you kick out like that."
peter tried it often, but always before he could kick out he sank.
what he really needed to know was how you sit on the water without sinking, and they said it was quite impossible to explain such an easy thing as that.
occasionally swans touched on the island, and he would give them all his day's food and then ask them how they sat on the water, but as soon as he had no more to give them the hateful things hissed at him and sailed away.
once he really thought he had discovered a way of reaching the gardens.
a wonderful white thing, like a runaway newspaper, floated high over the island and then tumbled, rolling over and over after the manner of a bird that has broken its wing.
peter was so frightened that he hid, but the birds told him it was only a kite, and what a kite is, and that it must have tugged its string out of a boy's hand, and soared away.
after that they laughed at peter for being so fond of the kite; he loved it so much that he even slept with one hand on it, and i think this was pathetic and pretty, for the reason he loved it was because it had belonged to a real boy.
-lsb- illustration: after this the birds said that they would help him no more in his mad enterprise -rsb- to the birds this was a very poor reason, but the older ones felt grateful to him at this time because he had nursed a number of fledglings through the german measles, and they offered to show him how birds fly a kite.
so six of them took the end of the string in their beaks and flew away with it; and to his amazement it flew after them and went even higher than they.
peter screamed out, "do it again!"
and with great good-nature they did it several times, and always instead of thanking them he cried, "do it again!"
which shows that even now he had not quite forgotten what it was to be a boy.
at last, with a grand design burning within his brave heart, he begged them to do it once more with him clinging to the tail, and now a hundred flew off with the string, and peter clung to the tail, meaning to drop off when he was over the gardens.
but the kite broke to pieces in the air, and he would have been drowned in the serpentine had he not caught hold of two indignant swans and made them carry him to the island.
after this the birds said that they would help him no more in his mad enterprise.
nevertheless, peter did reach the gardens at last by the help of shelley's boat, as i am now to tell you.
-lsb- illustration: tailpiece to "peter pan" -rsb- -lsb- illustration: headpiece to "the thrush's nest" -rsb- iii the thrush's nest shelley was a young gentleman and as grown-up as he need ever expect to be.
he was a poet; and they are never exactly grown-up.
they are people who despise money except what you need for to-day, and he had all that and five pounds over.
so, when he was walking in the kensington gardens, he made a paper boat of his bank-note, and sent it sailing on the serpentine.
it reached the island at night; and the look-out brought it to solomon caw, who thought at first that it was the usual thing, a message from a lady, saying she would be obliged if he could let her have a good one.
they always ask for the best one he has, and if he likes the letter he sends one from class a, but if it ruffles him he sends very funny ones indeed.
sometimes he sends none at all, and at another time he sends a nestful; it all depends on the mood you catch him in.
he likes you to leave it all to him, and if you mention particularly that you hope he will see his way to making it a boy this time, he is almost sure to send another girl.
and whether you are a lady or only a little boy who wants a baby-sister, always take pains to write your address clearly.
you ca n't think what a lot of babies solomon has sent to the wrong house.
shelley's boat, when opened, completely puzzled solomon, and he took counsel of his assistants, who having walked over it twice, first with their toes pointed out, and then with their toes pointed in, decided that it came from some greedy person who wanted five.
they thought this because there was a large five printed on it.
"preposterous!"
cried solomon in a rage, and he presented it to peter; anything useless which drifted upon the island was usually given to peter as a plaything.
but he did not play with his precious bank-note, for he knew what it was at once, having been very observant during the week when he was an ordinary boy.
with so much money, he reflected, he could surely at last contrive to reach the gardens, and he considered all the possible ways, and decided -lrb- wisely, i think -rrb- to choose the best way.
but, first, he had to tell the birds of the value of shelley's boat; and though they were too honest to demand it back, he saw that they were galled, and they cast such black looks at solomon, who was rather vain of his cleverness, that he flew away to the end of the island, and sat there very depressed with his head buried in his wings.
now peter knew that unless solomon was on your side, you never got anything done for you in the island, so he followed him and tried to hearten him.
-lsb- illustration: "preposterous!"
cried solomon in a rage -rsb- nor was this all that peter did to gain the powerful old fellow's good-will.
you must know that solomon had no intention of remaining in office all his life.
he looked forward to retiring by and by, and devoting his green old age to a life of pleasure on a certain yew-stump in the figs which had taken his fancy, and for years he had been quietly filling his stocking.
it was a stocking belonging to some bathing person which had been cast upon the island, and at the time i speak of it contained a hundred and eighty crumbs, thirty-four nuts, sixteen crusts, a pen-wiper, and a boot-lace.
when his stocking was full, solomon calculated that he would be able to retire on a competency.
peter now gave him a pound.
he cut it off his bank-note with a sharp stick.
this made solomon his friend for ever, and after the two had consulted together they called a meeting of the thrushes.
you will see presently why thrushes only were invited.
the scheme to be put before them was really peter's, but solomon did most of the talking, because he soon became irritable if other people talked.
he began by saying that he had been much impressed by the superior ingenuity shown by the thrushes in nest-building, and this put them into good-humour at once, as it was meant to do; for all the quarrels between birds are about the best way of building nests.
other birds, said solomon, omitted to line their nests with mud, and as a result they did not hold water.
here he cocked his head as if he had used an unanswerable argument; but, unfortunately, a mrs. finch had come to the meeting uninvited, and she squeaked out, "we do n't build nests to hold water, but to hold eggs," and then the thrushes stopped cheering, and solomon was so perplexed that he took several sips of water.
"consider," he said at last, "how warm the mud makes the nest."
"consider," cried mrs. finch, "that when water gets into the nest it remains there and your little ones are drowned."
the thrushes begged solomon with a look to say something crushing in reply to this, but again he was perplexed.
"try another drink," suggested mrs. finch pertly.
kate was her name, and all kates are saucy.
-lsb- illustration: for years he had been quietly filling his stocking -rsb- solomon did try another drink, and it inspired him.
"if," said he," a finch's nest is placed on the serpentine it fills and breaks to pieces, but a thrush's nest is still as dry as the cup of a swan's back."
how the thrushes applauded!
now they knew why they lined their nests with mud, and when mrs. finch called out, "we do n't place our nests on the serpentine," they did what they should have done at first -- chased her from the meeting.
after this it was most orderly.
what they had been brought together to hear, said solomon, was this: their young friend, peter pan, as they well knew, wanted very much to be able to cross to the gardens, and he now proposed, with their help, to build a boat.
at this the thrushes began to fidget, which made peter tremble for his scheme.
solomon explained hastily that what he meant was not one of the cumbrous boats that humans use; the proposed boat was to be simply a thrush's nest large enough to hold peter.
but still, to peter's agony, the thrushes were sulky.
"we are very busy people," they grumbled, "and this would be a big job."
"quite so," said solomon, "and, of course, peter would not allow you to work for nothing.
you must remember that he is now in comfortable circumstances, and he will pay you such wages as you have never been paid before.
peter pan authorises me to say that you shall all be paid sixpence a day."
then all the thrushes hopped for joy, and that very day was begun the celebrated building of the boat.
all their ordinary business fell into arrears.
it was the time of the year when they should have been pairing, but not a thrush's nest was built except this big one, and so solomon soon ran short of thrushes with which to supply the demand from the mainland.
the stout, rather greedy children, who look so well in perambulators but get puffed easily when they walk, were all young thrushes once, and ladies often ask specially for them.
what do you think solomon did?
he sent over to the house-tops for a lot of sparrows and ordered them to lay their eggs in old thrushes" nests, and sent their young to the ladies and swore they were all thrushes!
it was known afterwards on the island as the sparrows" year; and so, when you meet grown-up people in the gardens who puff and blow as if they thought themselves bigger than they are, very likely they belong to that year.
you ask them.
-lsb- illustration: when you meet grown-up people in the gardens who puff and blow as if they thought themselves bigger than they are -rsb- peter was a just master, and paid his work-people every evening.
they stood in rows on the branches, waiting politely while he cut the paper sixpences out of his bank-note, and presently he called the roll, and then each bird, as the names were mentioned, flew down and got sixpence.
it must have been a fine sight.
and at last, after months of labour, the boat was finished.
o the glory of peter as he saw it growing more and more like a great thrush's nest!
from the very beginning of the building of it he slept by its side, and often woke up to say sweet things to it, and after it was lined with mud and the mud had dried he always slept in it.
he sleeps in his nest still, and has a fascinating way of curling round in it, for it is just large enough to hold him comfortably when he curls round like a kitten.
it is brown inside, of course, but outside it is mostly green, being woven of grass and twigs, and when these wither or snap the walls are thatched afresh.
there are also a few feathers here and there, which came off the thrushes while they were building.
the other birds were extremely jealous, and said that the boat would not balance on the water, but it lay most beautifully steady; they said the water would come into it, but no water came into it.
next they said that peter had no oars, and this caused the thrushes to look at each other in dismay; but peter replied that he had no need of oars, for he had a sail, and with such a proud, happy face he produced a sail which he had fashioned out of his nightgown, and though it was still rather like a nightgown it made a lovely sail.
and that night, the moon being full, and all the birds asleep, he did enter his coracle -lrb- as master francis pretty would have said -rrb- and depart out of the island.
and first, he knew not why, he looked upward, with his hands clasped, and from that moment his eyes were pinned to the west.
he had promised the thrushes to begin by making short voyages, with them as his guides, but far away he saw the kensington gardens beckoning to him beneath the bridge, and he could not wait.
his face was flushed, but he never looked back; there was an exultation in his little breast that drove out fear.
was peter the least gallant of the english mariners who have sailed westward to meet the unknown?
at first, his boat turned round and round, and he was driven back to the place of his starting, whereupon he shortened sail, by removing one of the sleeves, and was forthwith carried backwards by a contrary breeze, to his no small peril.
he now let go the sail, with the result that he was drifted towards the far shore, where are black shadows he knew not the dangers of, but suspected them, and so once more hoisted his nightgown and went roomer of the shadows until he caught a favouring wind, which bore him westward, but at so great a speed that he was like to be broke against the bridge.
which, having avoided, he passed under the bridge and came, to his great rejoicing, within full sight of the delectable gardens.
but having tried to cast anchor, which was a stone at the end of a piece of the kite-string, he found no bottom, and was fain to hold off, seeking for moorage; and, feeling his way, he buffeted against a sunken reef that cast him overboard by the greatness of the shock, and he was near to being drowned, but clambered back into the vessel.
there now arose a mighty storm, accompanied by roaring of waters, such as he had never heard the like, and he was tossed this way and that, and his hands so numbed with the cold that he could not close them.
having escaped the danger of which, he was mercifully carried into a small bay, where his boat rode at peace.
nevertheless, he was not yet in safety; for, on pretending to disembark, he found a multitude of small people drawn up on the shore to contest his landing, and shouting shrilly to him to be off, for it was long past lock-out time.
this, with much brandishing of their holly-leaves; and also a company of them carried an arrow which some boy had left in the gardens, and this they were prepared to use as a battering-ram.
then peter, who knew them for the fairies, called out that he was not an ordinary human and had no desire to do them displeasure, but to be their friend; nevertheless, having found a jolly harbour, he was in no temper to draw off therefrom, and he warned them if they sought to mischief him to stand to their harms.
so saying, he boldly leapt ashore, and they gathered around him with intent to slay him, but there then arose a great cry among the women, and it was because they had now observed that his sail was a baby's nightgown.
whereupon, they straightway loved him, and grieved that their laps were too small, the which i can not explain, except by saying that such is the way of women.
the men-fairies now sheathed their weapons on observing the behaviour of their women, on whose intelligence they set great store, and they led him civilly to their queen, who conferred upon him the courtesy of the gardens after lock-out time, and henceforth peter could go whither he chose, and the fairies had orders to put him in comfort.
-lsb- illustration: he passed under the bridge and came within full sight of the delectable gardens -rsb- such was his first voyage to the gardens, and you may gather from the antiquity of the language that it took place a long time ago.
but peter never grows any older, and if we could be watching for him under the bridge to-night -lrb- but, of course, we ca n't -rrb-, i dare say we should see him hoisting his nightgown and sailing or paddling towards us in the thrush's nest.
when he sails, he sits down, but he stands up to paddle.
i shall tell you presently how he got his paddle.
long before the time for the opening of the gates comes he steals back to the island, for people must not see him -lrb- he is not so human as all that -rrb-, but this gives him hours for play, and he plays exactly as real children play.
at least he thinks so, and it is one of the pathetic things about him that he often plays quite wrongly.
you see, he had no one to tell him how children really play, for the fairies are all more or less in hiding until dusk, and so know nothing, and though the birds pretended that they could tell him a great deal, when the time for telling came, it was wonderful how little they really knew.
they told him the truth about hide-and-seek, and he often plays it by himself, but even the ducks on the round pond could not explain to him what it is that makes the pond so fascinating to boys.
every night the ducks have forgotten all the events of the day, except the number of pieces of cake thrown to them.
they are gloomy creatures, and say that cake is not what it was in their young days.
so peter had to find out many things for himself.
he often played ships at the round pond, but his ship was only a hoop which he had found on the grass.
of course, he had never seen a hoop, and he wondered what you play at with them, and decided that you play at pretending they are boats.
this hoop always sank at once, but he waded in for it, and sometimes he dragged it gleefully round the rim of the pond, and he was quite proud to think that he had discovered what boys do with hoops.
-lsb- illustration: there now arose a mighty storm, and he was tossed this way and that -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- another time, when he found a child's pail, he thought it was for sitting in, and he sat so hard in it that he could scarcely get out of it.
also he found a balloon.
it was bobbing about on the hump, quite as if it was having a game by itself, and he caught it after an exciting chase.
but he thought it was a ball, and jenny wren had told him that boys kick balls, so he kicked it; and after that he could not find it anywhere.
perhaps the most surprising thing he found was a perambulator.
it was under a lime-tree, near the entrance to the fairy queen's winter palace -lrb- which is within the circle of the seven spanish chestnuts -rrb-, and peter approached it warily, for the birds had never mentioned such things to him.
lest it was alive, he addressed it politely; and then, as it gave no answer, he went nearer and felt it cautiously.
he gave it a little push, and it ran from him, which made him think it must be alive after all; but, as it had run from him, he was not afraid.
so he stretched out his hand to pull it to him, but this time it ran at him, and he was so alarmed that he leapt the railing and scudded away to his boat.
you must not think, however, that he was a coward, for he came back next night with a crust in one hand and a stick in the other, but the perambulator had gone, and he never saw any other one.
i have promised to tell you also about his paddle.
it was a child's spade which he had found near st. govor's well, and he thought it was a paddle.
do you pity peter pan for making these mistakes?
if so, i think it rather silly of you.
what i mean is that, of course, one must pity him now and then, but to pity him all the time would be impertinence.
he thought he had the most splendid time in the gardens, and to think you have it is almost quite as good as really to have it.
he played without ceasing, while you often waste time by being mad-dog or mary-annish.
he could be neither of these things, for he had never heard of them, but do you think he is to be pitied for that?
oh, he was merry!
he was as much merrier than you, for instance, as you are merrier than your father.
sometimes he fell, like a spinning-top, from sheer merriment.
have you seen a greyhound leaping the fences of the gardens?
that is how peter leaps them.
-lsb- illustration: fairies are all more or less in hiding until dusk -rsb- and think of the music of his pipe.
gentlemen who walk home at night write to the papers to say they heard a nightingale in the gardens, but it is really peter's pipe they hear.
of course, he had no mother -- at least, what use was she to him?
you can be sorry for him for that, but do n't be too sorry, for the next thing i mean to tell you is how he revisited her.
it was the fairies who gave him the chance.
-lsb- illustration: tailpiece to "the thrush's nest" -rsb- -lsb- illustration: headpiece to "lock-out time" -rsb- iv lock-out time it is frightfully difficult to know much about the fairies, and almost the only thing known for certain is that there are fairies wherever there are children.
long ago children were forbidden the gardens, and at that time there was not a fairy in the place; then the children were admitted, and the fairies came trooping in that very evening.
they ca n't resist following the children, but you seldom see them, partly because they live in the daytime behind the railings, where you are not allowed to go, and also partly because they are so cunning.
they are not a bit cunning after lock-out, but until lock-out, my word!
-lsb- illustration: they are so cunning -rsb- -lsb- illustration: when they think you are not looking they skip along pretty lively -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- when you were a bird you knew the fairies pretty well, and you remember a good deal about them in your babyhood, which it is a great pity you ca n't write down, for gradually you forget, and i have heard of children who declared that they had never once seen a fairy.
very likely if they said this in the kensington gardens, they were standing looking at a fairy all the time.
the reason they were cheated was that she pretended to be something else.
this is one of their best tricks.
they usually pretend to be flowers, because the court sits in the fairies" basin, and there are so many flowers there, and all along the baby walk, that a flower is the thing least likely to attract attention.
they dress exactly like flowers, and change with the seasons, putting on white when lilies are in and blue for bluebells, and so on.
they like crocus and hyacinth time best of all, as they are partial to a bit of colour, but tulips -lrb- except white ones, which are the fairy cradles -rrb- they consider garish, and they sometimes put off dressing like tulips for days, so that the beginning of the tulip weeks is almost the best time to catch them.
when they think you are not looking they skip along pretty lively, but if you look, and they fear there is no time to hide, they stand quite still pretending to be flowers.
then, after you have passed without knowing that they were fairies, they rush home and tell their mothers they have had such an adventure.
the fairy basin, you remember, is all covered with ground-ivy -lrb- from which they make their castor-oil -rrb-, with flowers growing in it here and there.
most of them really are flowers, but some of them are fairies.
you never can be sure of them, but a good plan is to walk by looking the other way, and then turn round sharply.
another good plan, which david and i sometimes follow, is to stare them down.
after a long time they ca n't help winking, and then you know for certain that they are fairies.
-lsb- illustration: but if you look, and they fear there is no time to hide, they stand quite still pretending to be flowers -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- there are also numbers of them along the baby walk, which is a famous gentle place, as spots frequented by fairies are called.
once twenty-four of them had an extraordinary adventure.
they were a girls" school out for a walk with the governess, and all wearing hyacinth gowns, when she suddenly put her finger to her mouth, and then they all stood still on an empty bed and pretended to be hyacinths.
unfortunately what the governess had heard was two gardeners coming to plant new flowers in that very bed.
they were wheeling a hand-cart with the flowers in it, and were quite surprised to find the bed occupied.
"pity to lift them hyacinths," said the one man.
"duke's orders," replied the other, and, having emptied the cart, they dug up the boarding-school and put the poor, terrified things in it in five rows.
of course, neither the governess nor the girls dare let on that they were fairies, so they were carted far away to a potting-shed, out of which they escaped in the night without their shoes, but there was a great row about it among the parents, and the school was ruined.
as for their houses, it is no use looking for them, because they are the exact opposite of our houses.
you can see our houses by day but you ca n't see them by dark.
well, you can see their houses by dark, but you ca n't see them by day, for they are the colour of night, and i never heard of any one yet who could see night in the daytime.
this does not mean that they are black, for night has its colours just as day has, but ever so much brighter.
their blues and reds and greens are like ours with a light behind them.
the palace is entirely built of many-coloured glasses, and it is quite the loveliest of all royal residences, but the queen sometimes complains because the common people will peep in to see what she is doing.
they are very inquisitive folk, and press quite hard against the glass, and that is why their noses are mostly snubby.
the streets are miles long and very twisty, and have paths on each side made of bright worsted.
the birds used to steal the worsted for their nests, but a policeman has been appointed to hold on at the other end.
-lsb- illustration: the fairies are exquisite dancers -rsb- one of the great differences between the fairies and us is that they never do anything useful.
when the first baby laughed for the first time, his laugh broke into a million pieces, and they all went skipping about.
that was the beginning of fairies.
they look tremendously busy, you know, as if they had not a moment to spare, but if you were to ask them what they are doing, they could not tell you in the least.
they are frightfully ignorant, and everything they do is make-believe.
they have a postman, but he never calls except at christmas with his little box, and though they have beautiful schools, nothing is taught in them; the youngest child being chief person is always elected mistress, and when she has called the roll, they all go out for a walk and never come back.
it is a very noticeable thing that, in fairy families, the youngest is always chief person, and usually becomes a prince or princess; and children remember this, and think it must be so among humans also, and that is why they are often made uneasy when they come upon their mother furtively putting new frills on the basinette.
you have probably observed that your baby-sister wants to do all sorts of things that your mother and her nurse want her not to do -- to stand up at sitting-down time, and to sit down at stand-up time, for instance, or to wake up when she should fall asleep, or to crawl on the floor when she is wearing her best frock, and so on, and perhaps you put this down to naughtiness.
but it is not; it simply means that she is doing as she has seen the fairies do; she begins by following their ways, and it takes about two years to get her into the human ways.
her fits of passion, which are awful to behold, and are usually called teething, are no such thing; they are her natural exasperation, because we do n't understand her, though she is talking an intelligible language.
she is talking fairy.
the reason mothers and nurses know what her remarks mean, before other people know, as that "guch" means "give it to me at once," while "wa" is "why do you wear such a funny hat?"
is because, mixing so much with babies, they have picked up a little of the fairy language.
-lsb- illustration: a fairy ring -rsb- of late david has been thinking back hard about the fairy tongue, with his hands clutching his temples, and he has remembered a number of their phrases which i shall tell you some day if i do n't forget.
he had heard them in the days when he was a thrush, and though i suggested to him that perhaps it is really bird language he is remembering, he says not, for these phrases are about fun and adventures, and the birds talked of nothing but nest-building.
he distinctly remembers that the birds used to go from spot to spot like ladies at shop windows, looking at the different nests and saying, "not my colour, my dear," and "how would that do with a soft lining?"
and "but will it wear?"
and "what hideous trimming!"
and so on.
-lsb- illustration: these tricky fairies sometimes slyly change the board on a ball night -rsb- the fairies are exquisite dancers, and that is why one of the first things the baby does is to sign to you to dance to him and then to cry when you do it.
they hold their great balls in the open air, in what is called a fairy ring.
for weeks afterwards you can see the ring on the grass.
it is not there when they begin, but they make it by waltzing round and round.
sometimes you will find mushrooms inside the ring, and these are fairy chairs that the servants have forgotten to clear away.
the chairs and the rings are the only tell-tale marks these little people leave behind them, and they would remove even these were they not so fond of dancing that they toe it till the very moment of the opening of the gates.
david and i once found a fairy ring quite warm.
but there is also a way of finding out about the ball before it takes place.
you know the boards which tell at what time the gardens are to close to-day.
well, these tricky fairies sometimes slyly change the board on a ball night, so that it says the gardens are to close at six-thirty, for instance, instead of at seven.
this enables them to get begun half an hour earlier.
if on such a night we could remain behind in the gardens, as the famous maimie mannering did, we might see delicious sights; hundreds of lovely fairies hastening to the ball, the married ones wearing their wedding rings round their waists; the gentlemen, all in uniform, holding up the ladies" trains, and linkmen running in front carrying winter cherries, which are the fairy-lanterns; the cloakroom where they put on their silver slippers and get a ticket for their wraps; the flowers streaming up from the baby walk to look on, and always welcome because they can lend a pin; the supper-table, with queen mab at the head of it, and behind her chair the lord chamberlain, who carries a dandelion on which he blows when her majesty wants to know the time.
-lsb- illustration: linkmen running in front carrying winter cherries -rsb- the table-cloth varies according to the seasons, and in may it is made of chestnut blossom.
the way the fairy servants do is this: the men, scores of them, climb up the trees and shake the branches, and the blossom falls like snow.
then the lady servants sweep it together by whisking their skirts until it is exactly like a tablecloth, and that is how they get their tablecloth.
they have real glasses and real wine of three kinds, namely, blackthorn wine, berberris wine, and cowslip wine, and the queen pours out, but the bottles are so heavy that she just pretends to pour out.
there is bread-and-butter to begin with, of the size of a threepenny bit; and cakes to end with, and they are so small that they have no crumbs.
the fairies sit round on mushrooms, and at first they are well-behaved and always cough off the table, and so on, but after a bit they are not so well-behaved and stick their fingers into the butter, which is got from the roots of old trees, and the really horrid ones crawl over the tablecloth chasing sugar or other delicacies with their tongues.
when the queen sees them doing this she signs to the servants to wash up and put away, and then everybody adjourns to the dance, the queen walking in front while the lord chamberlain walks behind her, carrying two little pots, one of which contains the juice of wallflower and the other the juice of solomon's seal.
wallflower juice is good for reviving dancers who fall to the ground in a fit, and solomon's seal juice is for bruises.
they bruise very easily, and when peter plays faster and faster they foot it till they fall down in fits.
for, as you know without my telling you, peter pan is the fairies" orchestra.
he sits in the middle of the ring, and they would never dream of having a smart dance nowadays without him.
"p. p." is written on the corner of the invitation-cards sent out by all really good families.
they are grateful little people, too, and at the princess's coming-of-age ball -lrb- they come of age on their second birthday and have a birthday every month -rrb- they gave him the wish of his heart.
-lsb- illustration: when her majesty wants to know the time -rsb- the way it was done was this.
the queen ordered him to kneel, and then said that for playing so beautifully she would give him the wish of his heart.
then they all gathered round peter to hear what was the wish of his heart, but for a long time he hesitated, not being certain what it was himself.
"if i chose to go back to mother," he asked at last, "could you give me that wish?"
now this question vexed them, for were he to return to his mother they should lose his music, so the queen tilted her nose contemptuously and said, "pooh!
ask for a much bigger wish than that."
"is that quite a little wish?"
he inquired.
"as little as this," the queen answered, putting her hands near each other.
"what size is a big wish?"
he asked.
she measured it off on her skirt and it was a very handsome length.
then peter reflected and said, "well, then, i think i shall have two little wishes instead of one big one."
of course, the fairies had to agree, though his cleverness rather shocked them, and he said that his first wish was to go to his mother, but with the right to return to the gardens if he found her disappointing.
his second wish he would hold in reserve.
they tried to dissuade him, and even put obstacles in the way."
i can give you the power to fly to her house," the queen said, "but i ca n't open the door for you."
"the window i flew out at will be open," peter said confidently.
"mother always keeps it open in the hope that i may fly back."
"how do you know?"
they asked, quite surprised, and, really, peter could not explain how he knew."
i just do know," he said.
so as he persisted in his wish, they had to grant it.
the way they gave him power to fly was this: they all tickled him on the shoulder, and soon he felt a funny itching in that part, and then up he rose higher and higher, and flew away out of the gardens and over the housetops.
it was so delicious that instead of flying straight to his own home he skimmed away over st. paul's to the crystal palace and back by the river and regent's park, and by the time he reached his mother's window he had quite made up his mind that his second wish should be to become a bird.
the window was wide open, just as he knew it would be, and in he fluttered, and there was his mother lying asleep.
peter alighted softly on the wooden rail at the foot of the bed and had a good look at her.
she lay with her head on her hand, and the hollow in the pillow was like a nest lined with her brown wavy hair.
he remembered, though he had long forgotten it, that she always gave her hair a holiday at night.
how sweet the frills of her nightgown were!
he was very glad she was such a pretty mother.
but she looked sad, and he knew why she looked sad.
one of her arms moved as if it wanted to go round something, and he knew what it wanted to go round."
o mother!"
said peter to himself, "if you just knew who is sitting on the rail at the foot of the bed."
very gently he patted the little mound that her feet made, and he could see by her face that she liked it.
he knew he had but to say "mother" ever so softly, and she would wake up.
they always wake up at once if it is you that says their name.
then she would give such a joyous cry and squeeze him tight.
how nice that would be to him, but oh!
how exquisitely delicious it would be to her.
that, i am afraid, is how peter regarded it.
in returning to his mother he never doubted that he was giving her the greatest treat a woman can have.
nothing can be more splendid, he thought, than to have a little boy of your own.
how proud of him they are!
and very right and proper, too.
-lsb- illustration: the fairies sit round on mushrooms, and at first they are well behaved -rsb- but why does peter sit so long on the rail; why does he not tell his mother that he has come back?
i quite shrink from the truth, which is that he sat there in two minds.
sometimes he looked longingly at his mother, and sometimes he looked longingly at the window.
certainly it would be pleasant to be her boy again, but on the other hand, what times those had been in the gardens!
was he so sure that he should enjoy wearing clothes again?
he popped off the bed and opened some drawers to have a look at his old garments.
they were still there, but he could not remember how you put them on.
the socks, for instance, were they worn on the hands or on the feet?
he was about to try one of them on his hand, when he had a great adventure.
perhaps the drawer had creaked; at any rate, his mother woke up, for he heard her say "peter," as if it was the most lovely word in the language.
he remained sitting on the floor and held his breath, wondering how she knew that he had come back.
if she said "peter" again, he meant to cry "mother" and run to her.
but she spoke no more, she made little moans only, and when he next peeped at her she was once more asleep, with tears on her face.
it made peter very miserable, and what do you think was the first thing he did?
sitting on the rail at the foot of the bed, he played a beautiful lullaby to his mother on his pipe.
he had made it up himself out of the way she said "peter," and he never stopped playing until she looked happy.
he thought this so clever of him that he could scarcely resist wakening her to hear her say," o peter, how exquisitely you play!"
however, as she now seemed comfortable, he again cast looks at the window.
you must not think that he meditated flying away and never coming back.
he had quite decided to be his mother's boy, but hesitated about beginning to-night.
it was the second wish which troubled him.
he no longer meant to make it a wish to be a bird, but not to ask for a second wish seemed wasteful, and, of course, he could not ask for it without returning to the fairies.
also, if he put off asking for his wish too long it might go bad.
he asked himself if he had not been hard-hearted to fly away without saying good-bye to solomon."
i should like awfully to sail in my boat just once more," he said wistfully to his sleeping mother.
he quite argued with her as if she could hear him.
"it would be so splendid to tell the birds of this adventure," he said coaxingly."
i promise to come back," he said solemnly, and meant it, too.
-lsb- illustration: butter is got from the roots of old trees -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- and in the end, you know, he flew away.
twice he came back from the window, wanting to kiss his mother, but he feared the delight of it might waken her, so at last he played her a lovely kiss on his pipe, and then he flew back to the gardens.
many nights, and even months, passed before he asked the fairies for his second wish; and i am not sure that i quite know why he delayed so long.
one reason was that he had so many good-byes to say, not only to his particular friends, but to a hundred favourite spots.
then he had his last sail, and his very last sail, and his last sail of all, and so on.
again, a number of farewell feasts were given in his honour; and another comfortable reason was that, after all, there was no hurry, for his mother would never weary of waiting for him.
this last reason displeased old solomon, for it was an encouragement to the birds to procrastinate.
solomon had several excellent mottoes for keeping them at their work, such as "never put off laying to-day because you can lay to-morrow," and "in this world there are no second chances," and yet here was peter gaily putting off and none the worse for it.
the birds pointed this out to each other, and fell into lazy habits.
but, mind you, though peter was so slow in going back to his mother, he was quite decided to go back.
the best proof of this was his caution with the fairies.
they were most anxious that he should remain in the gardens to play to them, and to bring this to pass they tried to trick him into making such a remark as" i wish the grass was not so wet," and some of them danced out of time in the hope that he might cry," i do wish you would keep time!"
then they would have said that this was his second wish.
but he smoked their design, and though on occasions he began," i wish --" he always stopped in time.
so when at last he said to them bravely," i wish now to go back to mother for ever and always," they had to tickle his shoulders and let him go.
he went in a hurry in the end, because he had dreamt that his mother was crying, and he knew what was the great thing she cried for, and that a hug from her splendid peter would quickly make her to smile.
oh!
he felt sure of it, and so eager was he to be nestling in her arms that this time he flew straight to the window, which was always to be open for him.
-lsb- illustration: wallflower juice is good for reviving dancers who fall to the ground in a fit -rsb- but the window was closed, and there were iron bars on it, and peering inside he saw his mother sleeping peacefully with her arm round another little boy.
peter called, "mother!
mother!"
but she heard him not; in vain he beat his little limbs against the iron bars.
he had to fly back, sobbing, to the gardens, and he never saw his dear again.
what a glorious boy he had meant to be to her!
ah, peter!
we who have made the great mistake, how differently we should all act at the second chance.
but solomon was right -- there is no second chance, not for most of us.
when we reach the window it is lock-out time.
the iron bars are up for life.
-lsb- illustration: tailpiece to "lock-out time" -rsb- -lsb- illustration: headpiece to "the little house" -rsb- v the little house everybody has heard of the little house in the kensington gardens, which is the only house in the whole world that the fairies have built for humans.
but no one has really seen it, except just three or four, and they have not only seen it but slept in it, and unless you sleep in it you never see it.
this is because it is not there when you lie down, but it is there when you wake up and step outside.
in a kind of way every one may see it, but what you see is not really it, but only the light in the windows.
you see the light after lock-out time.
david, for instance, saw it quite distinctly far away among the trees as we were going home from the pantomime, and oliver bailey saw it the night he stayed so late at the temple, which is the name of his father's office.
angela clare, who loves to have a tooth extracted because then she is treated to tea in a shop, saw more than one light, she saw hundreds of them all together; and this must have been the fairies building the house, for they build it every night, and always in a different part of the gardens.
she thought one of the lights was bigger than the others, though she was not quite sure, for they jumped about so, and it might have been another one that was bigger.
but if it was the same one, it was peter pan's light.
heaps of children have seen the light, so that is nothing.
but maimie mannering was the famous one for whom the house was first built.
maimie was always rather a strange girl, and it was at night that she was strange.
she was four years of age, and in the daytime she was the ordinary kind.
she was pleased when her brother tony, who was a magnificent fellow of six, took notice of her, and she looked up to him in the right way, and tried in vain to imitate him, and was flattered rather than annoyed when he shoved her about.
also, when she was batting, she would pause though the ball was in the air to point out to you that she was wearing new shoes.
she was quite the ordinary kind in the daytime.
-lsb- illustration: peter pan is the fairies" orchestra -rsb- but as the shades of night fell, tony, the swaggerer, lost his contempt for maimie and eyed her fearfully; and no wonder, for with dark there came into her face a look that i can describe only as a leary look.
it was also a serene look that contrasted grandly with tony's uneasy glances.
then he would make her presents of his favourite toys -lrb- which he always took away from her next morning -rrb-, and she accepted them with a disturbing smile.
the reason he was now become so wheedling and she so mysterious was -lrb- in brief -rrb- that they knew they were about to be sent to bed.
it was then that maimie was terrible.
tony entreated her not to do it to-night, and the mother and their coloured nurse threatened her, but maimie merely smiled her agitating smile.
and by and by when they were alone with their night-light she would start up in bed crying "hsh!
what was that?"
tony beseeches her, "it was nothing -- do n't, maimie, do n't!"
and pulls the sheet over his head.
"it is coming nearer!"
she cries.
"oh, look at it, tony!
it is feeling your bed with its horns -- it is boring for you, o tony, oh!"
and she desists not until he rushes downstairs in his combinations, screeching.
when they came up to whip maimie they usually found her sleeping tranquilly -- not shamming, you know, but really sleeping, and looking like the sweetest little angel, which seems to me to make it almost worse.
but of course it was daytime when they were in the gardens, and then tony did most of the talking.
you could gather from his talk that he was a very brave boy, and no one was so proud of it as maimie.
she would have loved to have a ticket on her saying that she was his sister.
and at no time did she admire him more than when he told her, as he often did with splendid firmness, that one day he meant to remain behind in the gardens after the gates were closed."
o tony," she would say with awful respect, "but the fairies will be so angry!'"
i dare say," replied tony carelessly.
"perhaps," she said, thrilling, "peter pan will give you a sail in his boat!'"
i shall make him," replied tony; no wonder she was proud of him.
-lsb- illustration: they all tickled him on the shoulder -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- but they should not have talked so loudly, for one day they were overheard by a fairy who had been gathering skeleton leaves, from which the little people weave their summer curtains, and after that tony was a marked boy.
they loosened the rails before he sat on them, so that down he came on the back of his head; they tripped him up by catching his bootlace, and bribed the ducks to sink his boat.
nearly all the nasty accidents you meet with in the gardens occur because the fairies have taken an ill-will to you, and so it behoves you to be careful what you say about them.
maimie was one of the kind who like to fix a day for doing things, but tony was not that kind, and when she asked him which day he was to remain behind in the gardens after lock-out he merely replied, "just some day"; he was quite vague about which day except when she asked, "will it be to-day?"
and then he could always say for certain that it would not be to-day.
so she saw that he was waiting for a real good chance.
this brings us to an afternoon when the gardens were white with snow, and there was ice on the round pond; not thick enough to skate on, but at least you could spoil it for to-morrow by flinging stones, and many bright little boys and girls were doing that.
when tony and his sister arrived they wanted to go straight to the pond, but their ayah said they must take a sharp walk first, and as she said this she glanced at the time-board to see when the gardens closed that night.
it read half-past five.
poor ayah!
she is the one who laughs continuously because there are so many white children in the world, but she was not to laugh much more that day.
well, they went up the baby walk and back, and when they returned to the time-board she was surprised to see that it now read five o'clock for closing-time.
but she was unacquainted with the tricky ways of the fairies, and so did not see -lrb- as maimie and tony saw at once -rrb- that they had changed the hour because there was to be a ball to-night.
she said there was only time now to walk to the top of the hump and back, and as they trotted along with her she little guessed what was thrilling their little breasts.
you see the chance had come of seeing a fairy ball.
never, tony felt, could he hope for a better chance.
-lsb- illustration: one day they were overheard by a fairy -rsb- he had to feel this, for maimie so plainly felt it for him.
her eager eyes asked the question, "is it to-day?"
and he gasped and then nodded.
maimie slipped her hand into tony's, and hers was hot, but his was cold.
she did a very kind thing; she took off her scarf and gave it to him.
"in case you should feel cold," she whispered.
her face was aglow, but tony's was very gloomy.
as they turned on the top of the hump he whispered to her, "i'm afraid nurse would see me, so i sha n't be able to do it."
maimie admired him more than ever for being afraid of nothing but their ayah, when there were so many unknown terrors to fear, and she said aloud, "tony, i shall race you to the gate," and in a whisper, "then you can hide," and off they ran.
tony could always outdistance her easily, but never had she known him speed away so quickly as now, and she was sure he hurried that he might have more time to hide.
"brave, brave!"
her doting eyes were crying when she got a dreadful shock; instead of hiding, her hero had run out at the gate!
at this bitter sight maimie stopped blankly, as if all her lapful of darling treasures were suddenly spilled, and then for very disdain she could not sob; in a swell of protest against all puling cowards she ran to st. govor's well and hid in tony's stead.
when the ayah reached the gate and saw tony far in front she thought her other charge was with him and passed out.
twilight crept over the gardens, and hundreds of people passed out, including the last one, who always has to run for it, but maimie saw them not.
she had shut her eyes tight and glued them with passionate tears.
when she opened them something very cold ran up her legs and up her arms and dropped into her heart.
it was the stillness of the gardens.
then she heard clang, then from another part clang, then clang, clang far away.
it was the closing of the gates.
immediately the last clang had died away maimie distinctly heard a voice say, "so that's all right."
it had a wooden sound and seemed to come from above, and she looked up in time to see an elm-tree stretching out its arms and yawning.
-lsb- illustration: the little people weave their summer curtains from skeleton leaves -rsb- she was about to say," i never knew you could speak!"
when a metallic voice that seemed to come from the ladle at the well remarked to the elm," i suppose it is a bit coldish up there?"
and the elm replied, "not particularly, but you do get numb standing so long on one leg," and he flapped his arms vigorously just as the cabmen do before they drive off.
maimie was quite surprised to see that a number of other tall trees were doing the same sort of thing, and she stole away to the baby walk and crouched observantly under a minorca holly which shrugged its shoulders but did not seem to mind her.
she was not in the least cold.
she was wearing a russet-coloured pelisse and had the hood over her head, so that nothing of her showed except her dear little face and her curls.
the rest of her real self was hidden far away inside so many warm garments that in shape she seemed rather like a ball.
she was about forty round the waist.
there was a good deal going on in the baby walk, where maimie arrived in time to see a magnolia and a persian lilac step over the railing and set off for a smart walk.
they moved in a jerky sort of way certainly, but that was because they used crutches.
an elderberry hobbled across the walk, and stood chatting with some young quinces, and they all had crutches.
the crutches were the sticks that are tied to young trees and shrubs.
they were quite familiar objects to maimie, but she had never known what they were for until to-night.
-lsb- illustration: there was a good deal going on in the baby walk -rsb- she peeped up the walk and saw her first fairy.
he was a street boy fairy who was running up the walk closing the weeping trees.
the way he did it was this: he pressed a spring in the trunks and they shut like umbrellas, deluging the little plants beneath with snow."
o you naughty, naughty child!"
maimie cried indignantly, for she knew what it was to have a dripping umbrella about your ears.
fortunately the mischievous fellow was out of earshot, but a chrysanthemum heard her, and said so pointedly, "hoity-toity, what is this?"
that she had to come out and show herself.
then the whole vegetable kingdom was rather puzzled what to do.
-lsb- illustration: an afternoon when the gardens were white with snow -rsb- "of course it is no affair of ours," a spindle-tree said after they had whispered together, "but you know quite well you ought not to be here, and perhaps our duty is to report you to the fairies; what do you think yourself?'"
i think you should not," maimie replied, which so perplexed them that they said petulantly there was no arguing with her."
i would n't ask it of you," she assured them, "if i thought it was wrong," and of course after this they could not well carry tales.
they then said, "well-a-day," and "such is life," for they can be frightfully sarcastic; but she felt sorry for those of them who had no crutches, and she said good-naturedly, "before i go to the fairies" ball, i should like to take you for a walk one at a time; you can lean on me, you know."
at this they clapped their hands, and she escorted them up the baby walk and back again, one at a time, putting an arm or a finger round the very frail, setting their leg right when it got too ridiculous, and treating the foreign ones quite as courteously as the english, though she could not understand a word they said.
they behaved well on the whole, though some whimpered that she had not taken them as far as she took nancy or grace or dorothy, and others jagged her, but it was quite unintentional, and she was too much of a lady to cry out.
so much walking tired her, and she was anxious to be off to the ball, but she no longer felt afraid.
the reason she felt no more fear was that it was now night-time, and in the dark, you remember, maimie was always rather strange.
they were now loth to let her go, for, "if the fairies see you," they warned her, "they will mischief you -- stab you to death, or compel you to nurse their children, or turn you into something tedious, like an evergreen oak."
as they said this they looked with affected pity at an evergreen oak, for in winter they are very envious of the evergreens.
"oh, la!"
replied the oak bitingly, "how deliciously cosy it is to stand here buttoned to the neck and watch you poor naked creatures shivering."
this made them sulky, though they had really brought it on themselves, and they drew for maimie a very gloomy picture of the perils that would face her if she insisted on going to the ball.
-lsb- illustration: she ran to st. govor's well and hid -rsb- she learned from a purple filbert that the court was not in its usual good temper at present, the cause being the tantalising heart of the duke of christmas daisies.
he was an oriental fairy, very poorly of a dreadful complaint, namely, inability to love, and though he had tried many ladies in many lands he could not fall in love with one of them.
queen mab, who rules in the gardens, had been confident that her girls would bewitch him, but alas!
his heart, the doctor said, remained cold.
this rather irritating doctor, who was his private physician, felt the duke's heart immediately after any lady was presented, and then always shook his bald head and murmured, "cold, quite cold."
naturally queen mab felt disgraced, and first she tried the effect of ordering the court into tears for nine minutes, and then she blamed the cupids and decreed that they should wear fools" caps until they thawed the duke's frozen heart.
"how i should love to see the cupids in their dear little fools" caps!"
maimie cried, and away she ran to look for them very recklessly, for the cupids hate to be laughed at.
it is always easy to discover where a fairies" ball is being held, as ribbons are stretched between it and all the populous parts of the gardens, on which those invited may walk to the dance without wetting their pumps.
this night the ribbons were red, and looked very pretty on the snow.
-lsb- illustration: she escorted them up the baby walk and back again -rsb- maimie walked alongside one of them for some distance without meeting anybody, but at last she saw a fairy cavalcade approaching.
to her surprise they seemed to be returning from the ball, and she had just time to hide from them by bending her knees and holding out her arms and pretending to be a garden chair.
there were six horsemen in front and six behind; in the middle walked a prim lady wearing a long train held up by two pages, and on the train, as if it were a couch, reclined a lovely girl, for in this way do aristocratic fairies travel about.
she was dressed in golden rain, but the most enviable part of her was her neck, which was blue in colour and of a velvet texture, and of course showed off her diamond necklace as no white throat could have glorified it.
the high-born fairies obtain this admired effect by pricking their skin, which lets the blue blood come through and dye them, and you can not imagine anything so dazzling unless you have seen the ladies" busts in the jewellers" windows.
maimie also noticed that the whole cavalcade seemed to be in a passion, tilting their noses higher than it can be safe for even fairies to tilt them, and she concluded that this must be another case in which the doctor had said, "cold, quite cold."
-lsb- illustration: an elderberry hobbled across the walk, and stood chatting with some young quinces -rsb- well, she followed the ribbon to a place where it became a bridge over a dry puddle into which another fairy had fallen and been unable to climb out.
at first this little damsel was afraid of maimie, who most kindly went to her aid, but soon she sat in her hand chatting gaily and explaining that her name was brownie, and that though only a poor street singer she was on her way to the ball to see if the duke would have her.
"of course," she said," i am rather plain," and this made maimie uncomfortable, for indeed the simple little creature was almost quite plain for a fairy.
it was difficult to know what to reply."
i see you think i have no chance," brownie said falteringly."
i do n't say that," maimie answered politely; "of course your face is just a tiny bit homely, but --" really it was quite awkward for her.
fortunately she remembered about her father and the bazaar.
he had gone to a fashionable bazaar where all the most beautiful ladies in london were on view for half a crown the second day, but on his return home, instead of being dissatisfied with maimie's mother, he had said, "you ca n't think, my dear, what a relief it is to see a homely face again."
maimie repeated this story, and it fortified brownie tremendously, indeed she had no longer the slightest doubt that the duke would choose her.
so she scudded away up the ribbon, calling out to maimie not to follow lest the queen should mischief her.
but maimie's curiosity tugged her forward, and presently at the seven spanish chestnuts she saw a wonderful light.
she crept forward until she was quite near it, and then she peeped from behind a tree.
-lsb- illustration: a chrysanthemum heard her, and said pointedly, "hoity-toity, what is this?" -rsb-
the light, which was as high as your head above the ground, was composed of myriads of glow-worms all holding on to each other, and so forming a dazzling canopy over the fairy ring.
there were thousands of little people looking on, but they were in shadow and drab in colour compared to the glorious creatures within that luminous circle, who were so bewilderingly bright that maimie had to wink hard all the time she looked at them.
it was amazing and even irritating to her that the duke of christmas daisies should be able to keep out of love for a moment: yet out of love his dusky grace still was: you could see it by the shamed looks of the queen and court -lrb- though they pretended not to care -rrb-, by the way darling ladies brought forward for his approval burst into tears as they were told to pass on, and by his own most dreary face.
maimie could also see the pompous doctor feeling the duke's heart and hear him give utterance to his parrot cry, and she was particularly sorry for the cupids, who stood in their fools" caps in obscure places and, every time they heard that "cold, quite cold," bowed their disgraced little heads.
she was disappointed not to see peter pan, and i may as well tell you now why he was so late that night.
it was because his boat had got wedged on the serpentine between fields of floating ice, through which he had to break a perilous passage with his trusty paddle.
the fairies had as yet scarcely missed him, for they could not dance, so heavy were their hearts.
they forget all the steps when they are sad, and remember them again when they are merry.
david tells me that fairies never say, "we feel happy": what they say is, "we feel dancey."
well, they were looking very undancey indeed, when sudden laughter broke out among the onlookers, caused by brownie, who had just arrived and was insisting on her right to be presented to the duke.
maimie craned forward eagerly to see how her friend fared, though she had really no hope; no one seemed to have the least hope except brownie herself, who, however, was absolutely confident.
she was led before his grace, and the doctor putting a finger carelessly on the ducal heart, which for convenience" sake was reached by a little trap-door in his diamond shirt, had begun to say mechanically, "cold, qui --," when he stopped abruptly.
"what's this?"
he cried, and first he shook the heart like a watch, and then he put his ear to it.
"bless my soul!"
cried the doctor, and by this time of course the excitement among the spectators was tremendous, fairies fainting right and left.
-lsb- illustration: they warned her -rsb- everybody stared breathlessly at the duke, who was very much startled, and looked as if he would like to run away.
"good gracious me!"
the doctor was heard muttering, and now the heart was evidently on fire, for he had to jerk his fingers away from it and put them in his mouth.
the suspense was awful.
then in a loud voice, and bowing low, "my lord duke," said the physician elatedly," i have the honour to inform your excellency that your grace is in love."
you ca n't conceive the effect of it.
brownie held out her arms to the duke and he flung himself into them, the queen leapt into the arms of the lord chamberlain, and the ladies of the court leapt into the arms of her gentlemen, for it is etiquette to follow her example in everything.
thus in a single moment about fifty marriages took place, for if you leap into each other's arms it is a fairy wedding.
of course a clergyman has to be present.
how the crowd cheered and leapt!
trumpets brayed, the moon came out, and immediately a thousand couples seized hold of its rays as if they were ribbons in a may dance and waltzed in wild abandon round the fairy ring.
most gladsome sight of all, the cupids plucked the hated fools" caps from their heads and cast them high in the air.
and then maimie went and spoiled everything.
she could n't help it.
she was crazy with delight over her little friend's good fortune, so she took several steps forward and cried in an ecstasy," o brownie, how splendid!"
everybody stood still, the music ceased, the lights went out, and all in the time you may take to say, "oh dear!"
an awful sense of her peril came upon maimie; too late she remembered that she was a lost child in a place where no human must be between the locking and the opening of the gates; she heard the murmur of an angry multitude; she saw a thousand swords flashing for her blood, and she uttered a cry of terror and fled.
how she ran!
and all the time her eyes were starting out of her head.
many times she lay down, and then quickly jumped up and ran on again.
her little mind was so entangled in terrors that she no longer knew she was in the gardens.
the one thing she was sure of was that she must never cease to run, and she thought she was still running long after she had dropped in the figs and gone to sleep.
she thought the snowflakes falling on her face were her mother kissing her good-night.
she thought her coverlet of snow was a warm blanket, and tried to pull it over her head.
and when she heard talking through her dreams she thought it was mother bringing father to the nursery door to look at her as she slept.
but it was the fairies.
i am very glad to be able to say that they no longer desired to mischief her.
when she rushed away they had rent the air with such cries as "slay her!"
"turn her into something extremely unpleasant!"
and so on, but the pursuit was delayed while they discussed who should march in front, and this gave duchess brownie time to cast herself before the queen and demand a boon.
every bride has a right to a boon, and what she asked for was maimie's life.
"anything except that," replied queen mab sternly, and all the fairies echoed, "anything except that."
but when they learned how maimie had befriended brownie and so enabled her to attend the ball to their great glory and renown, they gave three huzzas for the little human, and set off, like an army, to thank her, the court advancing in front and the canopy keeping step with it.
they traced maimie easily by her footprints in the snow.
but though they found her deep in snow in the figs, it seemed impossible to thank maimie, for they could not waken her.
they went through the form of thanking her -- that is to say, the new king stood on her body and read her a long address of welcome, but she heard not a word of it.
they also cleared the snow off her, but soon she was covered again, and they saw she was in danger of perishing of cold.
"turn her into something that does not mind the cold," seemed a good suggestion of the doctor's, but the only thing they could think of that does not mind cold was a snowflake.
"and it might melt," the queen pointed out, so that idea had to be given up.
a magnificent attempt was made to carry her to a sheltered spot, but though there were so many of them she was too heavy.
by this time all the ladies were crying in their handkerchiefs, but presently the cupids had a lovely idea.
"build a house round her," they cried, and at once everybody perceived that this was the thing to do; in a moment a hundred fairy sawyers were among the branches, architects were running round maimie, measuring her; a bricklayer's yard sprang up at her feet, seventy-five masons rushed up with the foundation-stone, and the queen laid it, overseers were appointed to keep the boys off, scaffoldings were run up, the whole place rang with hammers and chisels and turning-lathes, and by this time the roof was on and the glaziers were putting in the windows.
-lsb- illustration: queen mab, who rules in the gardens -rsb- the house was exactly the size of maimie, and perfectly lovely.
one of her arms was extended, and this had bothered them for a second, but they built a verandah round it leading to the front door.
the windows were the size of a coloured picture-book and the door rather smaller, but it would be easy for her to get out by taking off the roof.
the fairies, as is their custom, clapped their hands with delight over their cleverness, and they were so madly in love with the little house that they could not bear to think they had finished it.
so they gave it ever so many little extra touches, and even then they added more extra touches.
for instance, two of them ran up a ladder and put on a chimney.
"now we fear it is quite finished," they sighed.
but no, for another two ran up the ladder, and tied some smoke to the chimney.
"that certainly finishes it," they said reluctantly.
"not at all," cried a glow-worm; "if she were to wake without seeing a night-light she might be frightened, so i shall be her night-light."
"wait one moment," said a china merchant, "and i shall make you a saucer."
now, alas!
it was absolutely finished.
oh, dear no!
"gracious me!"
cried a brass manufacturer, "there's no handle on the door," and he put one on.
an ironmonger added a scraper, and an old lady ran up with a door-mat.
carpenters arrived with a water-butt, and the painters insisted on painting it.
finished at last!
"finished!
how can it be finished," the plumber demanded scornfully, "before hot and cold are put in?"
and he put in hot and cold.
then an army of gardeners arrived with fairy carts and spades and seeds and bulbs and forcing-houses, and soon they had a flower-garden to the right of the verandah, and a vegetable garden to the left, and roses and clematis on the walls of the house, and in less time than five minutes all these dear things were in full bloom.
-lsb- illustration: shook his bald head and murmured, "cold, quite cold" -rsb- oh, how beautiful the little house was now!
but it was at last finished true as true, and they had to leave it and return to the dance.
they all kissed their hands to it as they went away, and the last to go was brownie.
she stayed a moment behind the others to drop a pleasant dream down the chimney.
all through the night the exquisite little house stood there in the figs taking care of maimie, and she never knew.
she slept until the dream was quite finished, and woke feeling deliciously cosy just as morning was breaking from its egg, and then she almost fell asleep again, and then she called out, "tony," for she thought she was at home in the nursery.
as tony made no answer, she sat up, whereupon her head hit the roof, and it opened like the lid of a box, and to her bewilderment she saw all around her the kensington gardens lying deep in snow.
as she was not in the nursery she wondered whether this was really herself, so she pinched her cheeks, and then she knew it was herself, and this reminded her that she was in the middle of a great adventure.
she remembered now everything that had happened to her from the closing of the gates up to her running away from the fairies, but how ever, she asked herself, had she got into this funny place?
she stepped out by the roof, right over the garden, and then she saw the dear house in which she had passed the night.
it so entranced her that she could think of nothing else."
o you darling!
o you sweet!
o you love!"
she cried.
perhaps a human voice frightened the little house, or maybe it now knew that its work was done, for no sooner had maimie spoken than it began to grow smaller; it shrank so slowly that she could scarce believe it was shrinking, yet she soon knew that it could not contain her now.
it always remained as complete as ever, but it became smaller and smaller, and the garden dwindled at the same time, and the snow crept closer, lapping house and garden up.
now the house was the size of a little dog's kennel, and now of a noah's ark, but still you could see the smoke and the door-handle and the roses on the wall, every one complete.
the glow-worm light was waning too, but it was still there.
"darling, loveliest, do n't go!"
maimie cried, falling on her knees, for the little house was now the size of a reel of thread, but still quite complete.
but as she stretched out her arms imploringly the snow crept up on all sides until it met itself, and where the little house had been was now one unbroken expanse of snow.
-lsb- illustration: fairies never say, "we feel happy": what they say is, "we feel dancey" -rsb- maimie stamped her foot naughtily, and was putting her fingers to her eyes, when she heard a kind voice say, "do n't cry, pretty human, do n't cry," and then she turned round and saw a beautiful little naked boy regarding her wistfully.
she knew at once that he must be peter pan.
-lsb- illustration: tailpiece to "the little house" -rsb- -lsb- illustration: headpiece to "peter's goat" -rsb- vi peter's goat maimie felt quite shy, but peter knew not what shy was."
i hope you have had a good night," he said earnestly.
"thank you," she replied," i was so cosy and warm.
but you" -- and she looked at his nakedness awkwardly -- "do n't you feel the least bit cold?"
now cold was another word peter had forgotten, so he answered," i think not, but i may be wrong: you see i am rather ignorant.
i am not exactly a boy; solomon says i am a betwixt-and-between."
"so that is what it is called," said maimie thoughtfully.
"that's not my name," he explained, "my name is peter pan."
"yes, of course," she said," i know, everybody knows."
you ca n't think how pleased peter was to learn that all the people outside the gates knew about him.
he begged maimie to tell him what they knew and what they said, and she did so.
they were sitting by this time on a fallen tree; peter had cleared off the snow for maimie, but he sat on a snowy bit himself.
"squeeze closer," maimie said.
"what is that?"
he asked, and she showed him, and then he did it.
they talked together and he found that people knew a great deal about him, but not everything, not that he had gone back to his mother and been barred out, for instance, and he said nothing of this to maimie, for it still humiliated him.
"do they know that i play games exactly like real boys?"
he asked very proudly."
o maimie, please tell them!"
but when he revealed how he played, by sailing his hoop on the round pond, and so on, she was simply horrified.
"all your ways of playing," she said with her big eyes on him, "are quite, quite wrong, and not in the least like how boys play."
poor peter uttered a little moan at this, and he cried for the first time for i know not how long.
maimie was extremely sorry for him, and lent him her handkerchief, but he did n't know in the least what to do with it, so she showed him, that is to say, she wiped her eyes, and then gave it back to him, saying, "now you do it," but instead of wiping his own eyes he wiped hers, and she thought it best to pretend that this was what she had meant.
-lsb- illustration: looking very undancey indeed -rsb- she said out of pity for him," i shall give you a kiss if you like," but though he once knew, he had long forgotten what kisses are, and he replied, "thank you," and held out his hand, thinking she had offered to put something into it.
this was a great shock to her, but she felt she could not explain without shaming him, so with charming delicacy she gave peter a thimble which happened to be in her pocket, and pretended that it was a kiss.
poor little boy!
he quite believed her, and to this day he wears it on his finger, though there can be scarcely any one who needs a thimble so little.
you see, though still a tiny child, it was really years and years since he had seen his mother, and i dare say the baby who had supplanted him was now a man with whiskers.
but you must not think that peter pan was a boy to pity rather than to admire; if maimie began by thinking this, she soon found she was very much mistaken.
her eyes glistened with admiration when he told her of his adventures, especially of how he went to and fro between the island and the gardens in the thrush's nest.
"how romantic!"
maimie exclaimed, but this was another unknown word, and he hung his head thinking she was despising him."
i suppose tony would not have done that?"
he said very humbly.
"never, never!"
she answered with conviction, "he would have been afraid."
"what is afraid?"
asked peter longingly.
he thought it must be some splendid thing."
i do wish you would teach me how to be afraid, maimie," he said."
i believe no one could teach that to you," she answered adoringly, but peter thought she meant that he was stupid.
she had told him about tony and of the wicked thing she did in the dark to frighten him -lrb- she knew quite well that it was wicked -rrb-, but peter misunderstood her meaning and said, "oh, how i wish i was as brave as tony!"
it quite irritated her.
"you are twenty thousand times braver than tony," she said; "you are ever so much the bravest boy i ever knew."
he could scarcely believe she meant it, but when he did believe he screamed with joy.
"and if you want very much to give me a kiss," maimie said, "you can do it."
very reluctantly peter began to take the thimble off his finger.
he thought she wanted it back."
i do n't mean a kiss," she said hurriedly," i mean a thimble."
"what's that?"
peter asked.
"it's like this," she said, and kissed him."
i should love to give you a thimble," peter said gravely, so he gave her one.
he gave her quite a number of thimbles, and then a delightful idea came into his head.
"maimie," he said, "will you marry me?"
-lsb- illustration: "my lord duke," said the physician elatedly," i have the honour to inform your excellency that your grace is in love" -rsb- now, strange to tell, the same idea had come at exactly the same time into maimie's head."
i should like to," she answered, "but will there be room in your boat for two?"
"if you squeeze close," he said eagerly.
"perhaps the birds would be angry?"
he assured her that the birds would love to have her, though i am not so certain of it myself.
also that there were very few birds in winter.
"of course they might want your clothes," he had to admit rather falteringly.
she was somewhat indignant at this.
"they are always thinking of their nests," he said apologetically, "and there are some bits of you" -- he stroked the fur on her pelisse -- "that would excite them very much."
"they sha n't have my fur," she said sharply.
"no," he said, still fondling it, however, "no.
o maimie," he said rapturously, "do you know why i love you?
it is because you are like a beautiful nest."
somehow this made her uneasy."
i think you are speaking more like a bird than a boy now," she said, holding back, and indeed he was even looking rather like a bird.
"after all," she said, "you are only a betwixt-and-between."
but it hurt him so much that she immediately added, "it must be a delicious thing to be."
"come and be one, then, dear maimie," he implored her, and they set off for the boat, for it was now very near open-gate time.
"and you are not a bit like a nest," he whispered to please her.
"but i think it is rather nice to be like one," she said in a woman's contradictory way.
"and, peter, dear, though i ca n't give them my fur, i would n't mind their building in it.
fancy a nest in my neck with little spotty eggs in it!
o peter, how perfectly lovely!"
-lsb- illustration: building the house for maimie -rsb- but as they drew near the serpentine, she shivered a little, and said, "of course i shall go and see mother often, quite often.
it is not as if i was saying good-bye for ever to mother, it is not in the least like that."
"oh no," answered peter, but in his heart he knew it was very like that, and he would have told her so had he not been in a quaking fear of losing her.
he was so fond of her, he felt he could not live without her.
"she will forget her mother in time, and be happy with me," he kept saying to himself, and he hurried her on, giving her thimbles by the way.
but even when she had seen the boat and exclaimed ecstatically over its loveliness, she still talked tremblingly about her mother.
"you know quite well, peter, do n't you," she said, "that i would n't come unless i knew for certain i could go back to mother whenever i want to?
peter, say it."
he said it, but he could no longer look her in the face.
"if you are sure your mother will always want you," he added rather sourly.
"the idea of mother's not always wanting me!"
maimie cried, and her face glistened.
"if she does n't bar you out," said peter huskily.
"the door," replied maimie, "will always, always be open, and mother will always be waiting at it for me."
"then," said peter, not without grimness, "step in, if you feel so sure of her," and he helped maimie into the thrush's nest.
"but why do n't you look at me?"
she asked, taking him by the arm.
peter tried hard not to look, he tried to push off, then he gave a great gulp and jumped ashore and sat down miserably in the snow.
she went to him.
"what is it, dear, dear peter?"
she said, wondering."
o maimie," he cried, "it is n't fair to take you with me if you think you can go back!
your mother" -- he gulped again -- "you do n't know them as well as i do."
and then he told her the woeful story of how he had been barred out, and she gasped all the time.
"but my mother," she said," my mother --" "yes, she would," said peter, "they are all the same.
i dare say she is looking for another one already."
maimie said aghast," i ca n't believe it.
you see, when you went away your mother had none, but my mother has tony, and surely they are satisfied when they have one."
peter replied bitterly, "you should see the letters solomon gets from ladies who have six."
just then they heard a grating creak, followed by creak, creak, all round the gardens.
it was the opening of the gates, and peter jumped nervously into his boat.
he knew maimie would not come with him now, and he was trying bravely not to cry.
but maimie was sobbing painfully.
"if i should be too late," she said in agony," o peter, if she has got another one already!"
again he sprang ashore as if she had called him back."
i shall come and look for you to-night," he said, squeezing close, "but if you hurry away i think you will be in time."
then he pressed a last thimble on her sweet little mouth, and covered his face with his hands so that he might not see her go.
"dear peter!"
she cried.
"dear maimie!"
cried the tragic boy.
she leapt into his arms, so that it was a sort of fairy wedding, and then she hurried away.
oh, how she hastened to the gates!
peter, you may be sure, was back in the gardens that night as soon as lock-out sounded, but he found no maimie, and so he knew she had been in time.
for long he hoped that some night she would come back to him; often he thought he saw her waiting for him by the shore of the serpentine as his bark drew to land, but maimie never went back.
she wanted to, but she was afraid that if she saw her dear betwixt-and-between again she would linger with him too long, and besides the ayah now kept a sharp eye on her.
but she often talked lovingly of peter, and she knitted a kettle-holder for him, and one day when she was wondering what easter present he would like, her mother made a suggestion.
-lsb- illustration: if the bad ones among the fairies happen to be out -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- "nothing," she said thoughtfully, "would be so useful to him as a goat."
"he could ride on it," cried maimie, "and play on his pipe at the same time."
"then," her mother asked, "wo n't you give him your goat, the one you frighten tony with at night?"
"but it is n't a real goat," maimie said.
"it seems very real to tony," replied her mother.
"it seems frightfully real to me too," maimie admitted, "but how could i give it to peter?"
her mother knew a way, and next day, accompanied by tony -lrb- who was really quite a nice boy, though of course he could not compare -rrb-, they went to the gardens, and maimie stood alone within a fairy ring, and then her mother, who was a rather gifted lady, said -- "my daughter, tell me, if you can, what have you got for peter pan?"
to which maimie replied --" i have a goat for him to ride, observe me cast it far and wide."
she then flung her arms about as if she were sowing seed, and turned round three times.
next tony said -- "if p. doth find it waiting here, wilt ne'er again make me to fear?"
and maimie answered -- "by dark or light i fondly swear never to see goats anywhere."
she also left a letter to peter in a likely place, explaining what she had done, and begging him to ask the fairies to turn the goat into one convenient for riding on.
well, it all happened just as she hoped, for peter found the letter, and of course nothing could be easier for the fairies than to turn the goat into a real one, and so that is how peter got the goat on which he now rides round the gardens every night playing sublimely on his pipe.
and maimie kept her promise, and never frightened tony with a goat again, though i have heard that she created another animal.
until she was quite a big girl she continued to leave presents for peter in the gardens -lrb- with letters explaining how humans play with them -rrb-, and she is not the only one who has done this.
david does it, for instance, and he and i know the likeliest place for leaving them in, and we shall tell you if you like, but for mercy's sake do n't ask us before porthos, for he is so fond of toys that, were he to find out the place, he would take every one of them.
-lsb- illustration: they will certainly mischief you -lrb- missing from book -rrb- -rsb- though peter still remembers maimie he is become as gay as ever, and often in sheer happiness he jumps off his goat and lies kicking merrily on the grass.
oh, he has a joyful time!
but he has still a vague memory that he was a human once, and it makes him especially kind to the house-swallows when they visit the island, for house-swallows are the spirits of little children who have died.
they always build in the eaves of the houses where they lived when they were humans, and sometimes they try to fly in at a nursery window, and perhaps that is why peter loves them best of all the birds.
and the little house?
every lawful night -lrb- that is to say, every night except ball nights -rrb- the fairies now build the little house lest there should be a human child lost in the gardens, and peter rides the marches looking for lost ones, and if he finds them he carries them on his goat to the little house, and when they wake up they are in it, and when they step out they see it.
the fairies build the house merely because it is so pretty, but peter rides round in memory of maimie, and because he still loves to do just as he believes real boys would do.
but you must not think that, because somewhere among the trees the little house is twinkling, it is a safe thing to remain in the gardens after lock-out time.
if the bad ones among the fairies happen to be out that night they will certainly mischief you, and even though they are not, you may perish of cold and dark before peter pan comes round.
he has been too late several times, and when he sees he is too late he runs back to the thrush's nest for his paddle, of which maimie had told him the true use, and he digs a grave for the child and erects a little tombstone, and carves the poor thing's initials on it.
he does this at once because he thinks it is what real boys would do, and you must have noticed the little stones, and that there are always two together.
he puts them in twos because they seem less lonely.
i think that quite the most touching sight in the gardens is the two tombstones of walter stephen matthews and phoebe phelps.
they stand together at the spot where the parish of westminster st. mary's is said to meet the parish of paddington.
here peter found the two babes, who had fallen unnoticed from their perambulators, phoebe aged thirteen months and walter probably still younger, for peter seems to have felt a delicacy about putting any age on his stone.
they lie side by side, and the simple inscriptions read -- + --------- + + --------- + | w. | | 13a | | st. m. | and | p. p. | | | | 1841.
| + --------- + + --------- + david sometimes places white flowers on these two innocent graves.
-lsb- illustration: i think that quite the most touching sight in the gardens is the two tombstones of walter stephen matthews and phoebe phelps -rsb- but how strange for parents, when they hurry into the gardens at the opening of the gates looking for their lost one, to find the sweetest little tombstone instead.
i do hope that peter is not too ready with his spade.
it is all rather sad.
_book_title_: james_matthew_barrie___peter_pan_in_kensington_gardens,_version_2.txt.out
peter pan if you ask your mother whether she knew about peter pan when she was a little girl she will say, "why, of course, i did, child," and if you ask her whether he rode on a goat in those days she will say, "what a foolish question to ask, certainly he did."
then if you ask your grandmother whether she knew about peter pan when she was a girl, she also says, "why, of course, i did, child," but if you ask her whether he rode on a goat in those days, she says she never heard of his having a goat.
perhaps she has forgotten, just as she sometimes forgets your name and calls you mildred, which is your mother's name.
still, she could hardly forget such an important thing as the goat.
therefore there was no goat when your grandmother was a little girl.
this shows that, in telling the story of peter pan, to begin with the goat -lrb- as most people do -rrb- is as silly as to put on your jacket before your vest.
of course, it also shows that peter is ever so old, but he is really always the same age, so that does not matter in the least.
his age is one week, and though he was born so long ago he has never had a birthday, nor is there the slightest chance of his ever having one.
the reason is that he escaped from being a human when he was seven days" old; he escaped by the window and flew back to the kensington gardens.
if you think he was the only baby who ever wanted to escape, it shows how completely you have forgotten your own young days.
when david heard this story first he was quite certain that he had never tried to escape, but i told him to think back hard, pressing his hands to his temples, and when he had done this hard, and even harder, he distinctly remembered a youthful desire to return to the tree-tops, and with that memory came others, as that he had lain in bed planning to escape as soon as his mother was asleep, and how she had once caught him half-way up the chimney.
all children could have such recollections if they would press their hands hard to their temples, for, having been birds before they were human, they are naturally a little wild during the first few weeks, and very itchy at the shoulders, where their wings used to be.
so david tells me.
i ought to mention here that the following is our way with a story: first, i tell it to him, and then he tells it to me, the understanding being that it is quite a different story; and then i retell it with his additions, and so we go on until no one could say whether it is more his story or mine.
in this story of peter pan, for instance, the bald narrative and most of the moral reflections are mine, though not all, for this boy can be a stern moralist, but the interesting bits about the ways and customs of babies in the bird-stage are mostly reminiscences of david's, recalled by pressing his hands to his temples and thinking hard.
well, peter pan got out by the window, which had no bars.
standing on the ledge he could see trees far away, which were doubtless the kensington gardens, and the moment he saw them he entirely forgot that he was now a little boy in a nightgown, and away he flew, right over the houses to the gardens.
it is wonderful that he could fly without wings, but the place itched tremendously, and, perhaps we could all fly if we were as dead-confident-sure of our capacity to do it as was bold peter pan that evening.
he alighted gaily on the open sward, between the baby's palace and the serpentine, and the first thing he did was to lie on his back and kick.
he was quite unaware already that he had ever been human, and thought he was a bird, even in appearance, just the same as in his early days, and when he tried to catch a fly he did not understand that the reason he missed it was because he had attempted to seize it with his hand, which, of course, a bird never does.
he saw, however, that it must be past lock-out time, for there were a good many fairies about, all too busy to notice him; they were getting breakfast ready, milking their cows, drawing water, and so on, and the sight of the water-pails made him thirsty, so he flew over to the round pond to have a drink.
he stooped, and dipped his beak in the pond; he thought it was his beak, but, of course, it was only his nose, and, therefore, very little water came up, and that not so refreshing as usual, so next he tried a puddle, and he fell flop into it.
when a real bird falls in flop, he spreads out his feathers and pecks them dry, but peter could not remember what was the thing to do, and he decided, rather sulkily, to go to sleep on the weeping beech in the baby walk.
at first he found some difficulty in balancing himself on a branch, but presently he remembered the way, and fell asleep.
he awoke long before morning, shivering, and saying to himself, "i never was out in such a cold night;" he had really been out in colder nights when he was a bird, but, of course, as everybody knows, what seems a warm night to a bird is a cold night to a boy in a nightgown.
peter also felt strangely uncomfortable, as if his head was stuffy, he heard loud noises that made him look round sharply, though they were really himself sneezing.
there was something he wanted very much, but, though he knew he wanted it, he could not think what it was.
what he wanted so much was his mother to blow his nose, but that never struck him, so he decided to appeal to the fairies for enlightenment.
they are reputed to know a good deal.
there were two of them strolling along the baby walk, with their arms round each other's waists, and he hopped down to address them.
the fairies have their tiffs with the birds, but they usually give a civil answer to a civil question, and he was quite angry when these two ran away the moment they saw him.
another was lolling on a garden-chair, reading a postage-stamp which some human had let fall, and when he heard peter's voice he popped in alarm behind a tulip.
to peter's bewilderment he discovered that every fairy he met fled from him.
a band of workmen, who were sawing down a toadstool, rushed away, leaving their tools behind them.
a milkmaid turned her pail upside down and hid in it.
soon the gardens were in an uproar.
crowds of fairies were running this way and that, asking each other stoutly, who was afraid, lights were extinguished, doors barricaded, and from the grounds of queen mab's palace came the rubadub of drums, showing that the royal guard had been called out.
a regiment of lancers came charging down the broad walk, armed with holly-leaves, with which they jog the enemy horribly in passing.
peter heard the little people crying everywhere that there was a human in the gardens after lock-out time, but he never thought for a moment that he was the human.
he was feeling stuffier and stuffier, and more and more wistful to learn what he wanted done to his nose, but he pursued them with the vital question in vain; the timid creatures ran from him, and even the lancers, when he approached them up the hump, turned swiftly into a side-walk, on the pretence that they saw him there.
despairing of the fairies, he resolved to consult the birds, but now he remembered, as an odd thing, that all the birds on the weeping beech had flown away when he alighted on it, and though that had not troubled him at the time, he saw its meaning now.
every living thing was shunning him.
poor little peter pan, he sat down and cried, and even then he did not know that, for a bird, he was sitting on his wrong part.
it is a blessing that he did not know, for otherwise he would have lost faith in his power to fly, and the moment you doubt whether you can fly, you cease forever to be able to do it.
the reason birds can fly and we ca n't is simply that they have perfect faith, for to have faith is to have wings.
now, except by flying, no one can reach the island in the serpentine, for the boats of humans are forbidden to land there, and there are stakes round it, standing up in the water, on each of which a bird-sentinel sits by day and night.
it was to the island that peter now flew to put his strange case before old solomon caw, and he alighted on it with relief, much heartened to find himself at last at home, as the birds call the island.
all of them were asleep, including the sentinels, except solomon, who was wide awake on one side, and he listened quietly to peter's adventures, and then told him their true meaning.
""look at your night-gown, if you do n't believe me," solomon said, and with staring eyes peter looked at his nightgown, and then at the sleeping birds.
not one of them wore anything.
""how many of your toes are thumbs?"
said solomon a little cruelly, and peter saw to his consternation, that all his toes were fingers.
the shock was so great that it drove away his cold.
""ruffle your feathers," said that grim old solomon, and peter tried most desperately hard to ruffle his feathers, but he had none.
then he rose up, quaking, and for the first time since he stood on the window-ledge, he remembered a lady who had been very fond of him.
""i think i shall go back to mother," he said timidly.
""good-bye," replied solomon caw with a queer look.
but peter hesitated.
""why do n't you go?"
the old one asked politely.
""i suppose," said peter huskily, "i suppose i can still fly?"
you see, he had lost faith.
""poor little half-and-half," said solomon, who was not really hard-hearted, "you will never be able to fly again, not even on windy days.
you must live here on the island always."
""and never even go to the kensington gardens?"
peter asked tragically.
""how could you get across?"
said solomon.
he promised very kindly, however, to teach peter as many of the bird ways as could be learned by one of such an awkward shape.
""then i sha'n' t be exactly a human?"
peter asked.
""no."
""nor exactly a bird?"
""no."
""what shall i be?"
""you will be a betwixt-and-between," solomon said, and certainly he was a wise old fellow, for that is exactly how it turned out.
the birds on the island never got used to him.
his oddities tickled them every day, as if they were quite new, though it was really the birds that were new.
they came out of the eggs daily, and laughed at him at once, then off they soon flew to be humans, and other birds came out of other eggs, and so it went on forever.
the crafty mother-birds, when they tired of sitting on their eggs, used to get the young one to break their shells a day before the right time by whispering to them that now was their chance to see peter washing or drinking or eating.
thousands gathered round him daily to watch him do these things, just as you watch the peacocks, and they screamed with delight when he lifted the crusts they flung him with his hands instead of in the usual way with the mouth.
all his food was brought to him from the gardens at solomon's orders by the birds.
he would not eat worms or insects -lrb- which they thought very silly of him -rrb-, so they brought him bread in their beaks.
thus, when you cry out, "greedy!
greedy!"
to the bird that flies away with the big crust, you know now that you ought not to do this, for he is very likely taking it to peter pan.
peter wore no night-gown now.
you see, the birds were always begging him for bits of it to line their nests with, and, being very good-natured, he could not refuse, so by solomon's advice he had hidden what was left of it.
but, though he was now quite naked, you must not think that he was cold or unhappy.
he was usually very happy and gay, and the reason was that solomon had kept his promise and taught him many of the bird ways.
to be easily pleased, for instance, and always to be really doing something, and to think that whatever he was doing was a thing of vast importance.
peter became very clever at helping the birds to build their nests; soon he could build better than a wood-pigeon, and nearly as well as a blackbird, though never did he satisfy the finches, and he made nice little water-troughs near the nests and dug up worms for the young ones with his fingers.
he also became very learned in bird-lore, and knew an east-wind from a west-wind by its smell, and he could see the grass growing and hear the insects walking about inside the tree-trunks.
but the best thing solomon had done was to teach him to have a glad heart.
all birds have glad hearts unless you rob their nests, and so as they were the only kind of heart solomon knew about, it was easy to him to teach peter how to have one.
peter's heart was so glad that he felt he must sing all day long, just as the birds sing for joy, but, being partly human, he needed in instrument, so he made a pipe of reeds, and he used to sit by the shore of the island of an evening, practising the sough of the wind and the ripple of the water, and catching handfuls of the shine of the moon, and he put them all in his pipe and played them so beautifully that even the birds were deceived, and they would say to each other, "was that a fish leaping in the water or was it peter playing leaping fish on his pipe?"
and sometimes he played the birth of birds, and then the mothers would turn round in their nests to see whether they had laid an egg.
if you are a child of the gardens you must know the chestnut-tree near the bridge, which comes out in flower first of all the chestnuts, but perhaps you have not heard why this tree leads the way.
it is because peter wearies for summer and plays that it has come, and the chestnut being so near, hears him and is cheated.
but as peter sat by the shore tootling divinely on his pipe he sometimes fell into sad thoughts and then the music became sad also, and the reason of all this sadness was that he could not reach the gardens, though he could see them through the arch of the bridge.
he knew he could never be a real human again, and scarcely wanted to be one, but oh, how he longed to play as other children play, and of course there is no such lovely place to play in as the gardens.
the birds brought him news of how boys and girls play, and wistful tears started in peter's eyes.
perhaps you wonder why he did not swim across.
the reason was that he could not swim.
he wanted to know how to swim, but no one on the island knew the way except the ducks, and they are so stupid.
they were quite willing to teach him, but all they could say about it was, "you sit down on the top of the water in this way, and then you kick out like that."
peter tried it often, but always before he could kick out he sank.
what he really needed to know was how you sit on the water without sinking, and they said it was quite impossible to explain such an easy thing as that.
occasionally swans touched on the island, and he would give them all his day's food and then ask them how they sat on the water, but as soon as he had no more to give them the hateful things hissed at him and sailed away.
once he really thought he had discovered a way of reaching the gardens.
a wonderful white thing, like a runaway newspaper, floated high over the island and then tumbled, rolling over and over after the manner of a bird that has broken its wing.
peter was so frightened that he hid, but the birds told him it was only a kite, and what a kite is, and that it must have tugged its string out of a boy's hand, and soared away.
after that they laughed at peter for being so fond of the kite, he loved it so much that he even slept with one hand on it, and i think this was pathetic and pretty, for the reason he loved it was because it had belonged to a real boy.
to the birds this was a very poor reason, but the older ones felt grateful to him at this time because he had nursed a number of fledglings through the german measles, and they offered to show him how birds fly a kite.
so six of them took the end of the string in their beaks and flew away with it; and to his amazement it flew after them and went even higher than they.
peter screamed out, "do it again!"
and with great good nature they did it several times, and always instead of thanking them he cried, "do it again!"
which shows that even now he had not quite forgotten what it was to be a boy.
at last, with a grand design burning within his brave heart, he begged them to do it once more with him clinging to the tail, and now a hundred flew off with the string, and peter clung to the tail, meaning to drop off when he was over the gardens.
but the kite broke to pieces in the air, and he would have drowned in the serpentine had he not caught hold of two indignant swans and made them carry him to the island.
after this the birds said that they would help him no more in his mad enterprise.
nevertheless, peter did reach the gardens at last by the help of shelley's boat, as i am now to tell you.
the thrush's nest shelley was a young gentleman and as grown-up as he need ever expect to be.
he was a poet; and they are never exactly grown-up.
they are people who despise money except what you need for to-day, and he had all that and five pounds over.
so, when he was walking in the kensington gardens, he made a paper boat of his bank-note, and sent it sailing on the serpentine.
it reached the island at night: and the look-out brought it to solomon caw, who thought at first that it was the usual thing, a message from a lady, saying she would be obliged if he could let her have a good one.
they always ask for the best one he has, and if he likes the letter he sends one from class a, but if it ruffles him he sends very funny ones indeed.
sometimes he sends none at all, and at another time he sends a nestful; it all depends on the mood you catch him in.
he likes you to leave it all to him, and if you mention particularly that you hope he will see his way to making it a boy this time, he is almost sure to send another girl.
and whether you are a lady or only a little boy who wants a baby-sister, always take pains to write your address clearly.
you ca n't think what a lot of babies solomon has sent to the wrong house.
shelley's boat, when opened, completely puzzled solomon, and he took counsel of his assistants, who having walked over it twice, first with their toes pointed out, and then with their toes pointed in, decided that it came from some greedy person who wanted five.
they thought this because there was a large five printed on it.
""preposterous!"
cried solomon in a rage, and he presented it to peter; anything useless which drifted upon the island was usually given to peter as a play-thing.
but he did not play with his precious bank-note, for he knew what it was at once, having been very observant during the week when he was an ordinary boy.
with so much money, he reflected, he could surely at last contrive to reach the gardens, and he considered all the possible ways, and decided -lrb- wisely, i think -rrb- to choose the best way.
but, first, he had to tell the birds of the value of shelley's boat; and though they were too honest to demand it back, he saw that they were galled, and they cast such black looks at solomon, who was rather vain of his cleverness, that he flew away to the end of the island, and sat there very depressed with his head buried in his wings.
now peter knew that unless solomon was on your side, you never got anything done for you in the island, so he followed him and tried to hearten him.
nor was this all that peter did to pin the powerful old fellow's good will.
you must know that solomon had no intention of remaining in office all his life.
he looked forward to retiring by-and-by, and devoting his green old age to a life of pleasure on a certain yew-stump in the figs which had taken his fancy, and for years he had been quietly filling his stocking.
it was a stocking belonging to some bathing person which had been cast upon the island, and at the time i speak of it contained a hundred and eighty crumbs, thirty-four nuts, sixteen crusts, a pen-wiper and a bootlace.
when his stocking was full, solomon calculated that he would be able to retire on a competency.
peter now gave him a pound.
he cut it off his bank-note with a sharp stick.
this made solomon his friend for ever, and after the two had consulted together they called a meeting of the thrushes.
you will see presently why thrushes only were invited.
the scheme to be put before them was really peter's, but solomon did most of the talking, because he soon became irritable if other people talked.
he began by saying that he had been much impressed by the superior ingenuity shown by the thrushes in nest-building, and this put them into good-humour at once, as it was meant to do; for all the quarrels between birds are about the best way of building nests.
other birds, said solomon, omitted to line their nests with mud, and as a result they did not hold water.
here he cocked his head as if he had used an unanswerable argument; but, unfortunately, a mrs. finch had come to the meeting uninvited, and she squeaked out, "we do n't build nests to hold water, but to hold eggs," and then the thrushes stopped cheering, and solomon was so perplexed that he took several sips of water.
""consider," he said at last, "how warm the mud makes the nest."
""consider," cried mrs. finch, "that when water gets into the nest it remains there and your little ones are drowned."
the thrushes begged solomon with a look to say something crushing in reply to this, but again he was perplexed.
""try another drink," suggested mrs. finch pertly.
kate was her name, and all kates are saucy.
solomon did try another drink, and it inspired him.
""if," said he, "a finch's nest is placed on the serpentine it fills and breaks to pieces, but a thrush's nest is still as dry as the cup of a swan's back."
how the thrushes applauded!
now they knew why they lined their nests with mud, and when mrs. finch called out, "we do n't place our nests on the serpentine," they did what they should have done at first: chased her from the meeting.
after this it was most orderly.
what they had been brought together to hear, said solomon, was this: their young friend, peter pan, as they well knew, wanted very much to be able to cross to the gardens, and he now proposed, with their help, to build a boat.
at this the thrushes began to fidget, which made peter tremble for his scheme.
solomon explained hastily that what he meant was not one of the cumbrous boats that humans use; the proposed boat was to be simply a thrush's nest large enough to hold peter.
but still, to peter's agony, the thrushes were sulky.
""we are very busy people," they grumbled, "and this would be a big job."
""quite so," said solomon, "and, of course, peter would not allow you to work for nothing.
you must remember that he is now in comfortable circumstances, and he will pay you such wages as you have never been paid before.
peter pan authorises me to say that you shall all be paid sixpence a day."
then all the thrushes hopped for joy, and that very day was begun the celebrated building of the boat.
all their ordinary business fell into arrears.
it was the time of year when they should have been pairing, but not a thrush's nest was built except this big one, and so solomon soon ran short of thrushes with which to supply the demand from the mainland.
the stout, rather greedy children, who look so well in perambulators but get puffed easily when they walk, were all young thrushes once, and ladies often ask specially for them.
what do you think solomon did?
he sent over to the housetops for a lot of sparrows and ordered them to lay their eggs in old thrushes" nests and sent their young to the ladies and swore they were all thrushes!
it was known afterward on the island as the sparrows" year, and so, when you meet, as you doubtless sometimes do, grown-up people who puff and blow as if they thought themselves bigger than they are, very likely they belong to that year.
you ask them.
peter was a just master, and paid his work-people every evening.
they stood in rows on the branches, waiting politely while he cut the paper sixpences out of his bank-note, and presently he called the roll, and then each bird, as the names were mentioned, flew down and got sixpence.
it must have been a fine sight.
and at last, after months of labor, the boat was finished.
oh, the deportment of peter as he saw it growing more and more like a great thrush's nest!
from the very beginning of the building of it he slept by its side, and often woke up to say sweet things to it, and after it was lined with mud and the mud had dried he always slept in it.
he sleeps in his nest still, and has a fascinating way of curling round in it, for it is just large enough to hold him comfortably when he curls round like a kitten.
it is brown inside, of course, but outside it is mostly green, being woven of grass and twigs, and when these wither or snap the walls are thatched afresh.
there are also a few feathers here and there, which came off the thrushes while they were building.
the other birds were extremely jealous and said that the boat would not balance on the water, but it lay most beautifully steady; they said the water would come into it, but no water came into it.
next they said that peter had no oars, and this caused the thrushes to look at each other in dismay, but peter replied that he had no need of oars, for he had a sail, and with such a proud, happy face he produced a sail which he had fashioned out of this night-gown, and though it was still rather like a night-gown it made a lovely sail.
and that night, the moon being full, and all the birds asleep, he did enter his coracle -lrb- as master francis pretty would have said -rrb- and depart out of the island.
and first, he knew not why, he looked upward, with his hands clasped, and from that moment his eyes were pinned to the west.
he had promised the thrushes to begin by making short voyages, with them to his guides, but far away he saw the kensington gardens beckoning to him beneath the bridge, and he could not wait.
his face was flushed, but he never looked back; there was an exultation in his little breast that drove out fear.
was peter the least gallant of the english mariners who have sailed westward to meet the unknown?
at first, his boat turned round and round, and he was driven back to the place of his starting, whereupon he shortened sail, by removing one of the sleeves, and was forthwith carried backward by a contrary breeze, to his no small peril.
he now let go the sail, with the result that he was drifted toward the far shore, where are black shadows he knew not the dangers of, but suspected them, and so once more hoisted his night-gown and went roomer of the shadows until he caught a favouring wind, which bore him westward, but at so great a speed that he was like to be broke against the bridge.
which, having avoided, he passed under the bridge and came, to his great rejoicing, within full sight of the delectable gardens.
but having tried to cast anchor, which was a stone at the end of a piece of the kite-string, he found no bottom, and was fain to hold off, seeking for moorage, and, feeling his way, he buffeted against a sunken reef that cast him overboard by the greatness of the shock, and he was near to being drowned, but clambered back into the vessel.
there now arose a mighty storm, accompanied by roaring of waters, such as he had never heard the like, and he was tossed this way and that, and his hands so numbed with the cold that he could not close them.
having escaped the danger of which, he was mercifully carried into a small bay, where his boat rode at peace.
nevertheless, he was not yet in safety; for, on pretending to disembark, he found a multitude of small people drawn up on the shore to contest his landing; and shouting shrilly to him to be off, for it was long past lock-out time.
this, with much brandishing of their holly-leaves, and also a company of them carried an arrow which some boy had left in the gardens, and this they were prepared to use as a battering-ram.
then peter, who knew them for the fairies, called out that he was not an ordinary human and had no desire to do them displeasure, but to be their friend, nevertheless, having found a jolly harbour, he was in no temper to draw off there-from, and he warned them if they sought to mischief him to stand to their harms.
so saying; he boldly leapt ashore, and they gathered around him with intent to slay him, but there then arose a great cry among the women, and it was because they had now observed that his sail was a baby's night-gown.
whereupon, they straightway loved him, and grieved that their laps were too small, the which i can not explain, except by saying that such is the way of women.
the men-fairies now sheathed their weapons on observing the behaviour of their women, on whose intelligence they set great store, and they led him civilly to their queen, who conferred upon him the courtesy of the gardens after lock-out time, and henceforth peter could go whither he chose, and the fairies had orders to put him in comfort.
such was his first voyage to the gardens, and you may gather from the antiquity of the language that it took place a long time ago.
but peter never grows any older, and if we could be watching for him under the bridge to-night -lrb- but, of course, we ca n't -rrb-, i daresay we should see him hoisting his night-gown and sailing or paddling toward us in the thrush's nest.
when he sails, he sits down, but he stands up to paddle.
i shall tell you presently how he got his paddle.
long before the time for the opening of the gates comes he steals back to the island, for people must not see him -lrb- he is not so human as all that -rrb-, but this gives him hours for play, and he plays exactly as real children play.
at least he thinks so, and it is one of the pathetic things about him that he often plays quite wrongly.
you see, he had no one to tell him how children really play, for the fairies were all more or less in hiding until dusk, and so know nothing, and though the buds pretended that they could tell him a great deal, when the time for telling came, it was wonderful how little they really knew.
they told him the truth about hide-and-seek, and he often plays it by himself, but even the ducks on the round pond could not explain to him what it is that makes the pond so fascinating to boys.
every night the ducks have forgotten all the events of the day, except the number of pieces of cake thrown to them.
they are gloomy creatures, and say that cake is not what it was in their young days.
so peter had to find out many things for himself.
he often played ships at the round pond, but his ship was only a hoop which he had found on the grass.
of course, he had never seen a hoop, and he wondered what you play at with them, and decided that you play at pretending they are boats.
this hoop always sank at once, but he waded in for it, and sometimes he dragged it gleefully round the rim of the pond, and he was quite proud to think that he had discovered what boys do with hoops.
another time, when he found a child's pail, he thought it was for sitting in, and he sat so hard in it that he could scarcely get out of it.
also he found a balloon.
it was bobbing about on the hump, quite as if it was having a game by itself, and he caught it after an exciting chase.
but he thought it was a ball, and jenny wren had told him that boys kick balls, so he kicked it; and after that he could not find it anywhere.
perhaps the most surprising thing he found was a perambulator.
it was under a lime-tree, near the entrance to the fairy queen's winter palace -lrb- which is within the circle of the seven spanish chestnuts -rrb-, and peter approached it warily, for the birds had never mentioned such things to him.
lest it was alive, he addressed it politely, and then, as it gave no answer, he went nearer and felt it cautiously.
he gave it a little push, and it ran from him, which made him think it must be alive after all; but, as it had run from him, he was not afraid.
so he stretched out his hand to pull it to him, but this time it ran at him, and he was so alarmed that he leapt the railing and scudded away to his boat.
you must not think, however, that he was a coward, for he came back next night with a crust in one hand and a stick in the other, but the perambulator had gone, and he never saw another one.
i have promised to tell you also about his paddle.
it was a child's spade which he had found near st. govor's well, and he thought it was a paddle.
do you pity peter pan for making these mistakes?
if so, i think it rather silly of you.
what i mean is that, of course, one must pity him now and then, but to pity him all the time would be impertinence.
he thought he had the most splendid time in the gardens, and to think you have it is almost quite as good as really to have it.
he played without ceasing, while you often waste time by being mad-dog or mary-annish.
he could be neither of these things, for he had never heard of them, but do you think he is to be pitied for that?
oh, he was merry.
he was as much merrier than you, for instance, as you are merrier than your father.
sometimes he fell, like a spinning-top, from sheer merriment.
have you seen a greyhound leaping the fences of the gardens?
that is how peter leaps them.
and think of the music of his pipe.
gentlemen who walk home at night write to the papers to say they heard a nightingale in the gardens, but it is really peter's pipe they hear.
of course, he had no mother -- at least, what use was she to him?
you can be sorry for him for that, but do n't be too sorry, for the next thing i mean to tell you is how he revisited her.
it was the fairies who gave him the chance.
the little house everybody has heard of the little house in the kensington gardens, which is the only house in the whole world that the fairies have built for humans.
but no one has really seen it, except just three or four, and they have not only seen it but slept in it, and unless you sleep in it you never see it.
this is because it is not there when you lie down, but it is there when you wake up and step outside.
in a kind of way everyone may see it, but what you see is not really it, but only the light in the windows.
you see the light after lock-out time.
david, for instance, saw it quite distinctly far away among the trees as we were going home from the pantomime, and oliver bailey saw it the night he stayed so late at the temple, which is the name of his father's office.
angela clare, who loves to have a tooth extracted because then she is treated to tea in a shop, saw more than one light, she saw hundreds of them all together, and this must have been the fairies building the house, for they build it every night and always in a different part of the gardens.
she thought one of the lights was bigger than the others, though she was not quite sure, for they jumped about so, and it might have been another one that was bigger.
but if it was the same one, it was peter pan's light.
heaps of children have seen the fight, so that is nothing.
but maimie mannering was the famous one for whom the house was first built.
maimie was always rather a strange girl, and it was at night that she was strange.
she was four years of age, and in the daytime she was the ordinary kind.
she was pleased when her brother tony, who was a magnificent fellow of six, took notice of her, and she looked up to him in the right way, and tried in vain to imitate him and was flattered rather than annoyed when he shoved her about.
also, when she was batting she would pause though the ball was in the air to point out to you that she was wearing new shoes.
she was quite the ordinary kind in the daytime.
but as the shades of night fell, tony, the swaggerer, lost his contempt for maimie and eyed her fearfully, and no wonder, for with dark there came into her face a look that i can describe only as a leary look.
it was also a serene look that contrasted grandly with tony's uneasy glances.
then he would make her presents of his favourite toys -lrb- which he always took away from her next morning -rrb- and she accepted them with a disturbing smile.
the reason he was now become so wheedling and she so mysterious was -lrb- in brief -rrb- that they knew they were about to be sent to bed.
it was then that maimie was terrible.
tony entreated her not to do it to-night, and the mother and their coloured nurse threatened her, but maimie merely smiled her agitating smile.
and by-and-by when they were alone with their night-light she would start up in bed crying "hsh!
what was that?"
tony beseeches her!
""it was nothing -- do n't, maimie, do n't!"
and pulls the sheet over his head.
""it is coming nearer!"
she cries; "oh, look at it, tony!
it is feeling your bed with its horns -- it is boring for you, oh, tony, oh!"
and she desists not until he rushes downstairs in his combinations, screeching.
when they came up to whip maimie they usually found her sleeping tranquilly, not shamming, you know, but really sleeping, and looking like the sweetest little angel, which seems to me to make it almost worse.
but of course it was daytime when they were in the gardens, and then tony did most of the talking.
you could gather from his talk that he was a very brave boy, and no one was so proud of it as maimie.
she would have loved to have a ticket on her saying that she was his sister.
and at no time did she admire him more than when he told her, as he often did with splendid firmness, that one day he meant to remain behind in the gardens after the gates were closed.
""oh, tony," she would say, with awful respect, "but the fairies will be so angry!"
""i daresay," replied tony, carelessly.
""perhaps," she said, thrilling, "peter pan will give you a sail in his boat!"
""i shall make him," replied tony; no wonder she was proud of him.
but they should not have talked so loudly, for one day they were overheard by a fairy who had been gathering skeleton leaves, from which the little people weave their summer curtains, and after that tony was a marked boy.
they loosened the rails before he sat on them, so that down he came on the back of his head; they tripped him up by catching his bootlace and bribed the ducks to sink his boat.
nearly all the nasty accidents you meet with in the gardens occur because the fairies have taken an ill-will to you, and so it behoves you to be careful what you say about them.
maimie was one of the kind who like to fix a day for doing things, but tony was not that kind, and when she asked him which day he was to remain behind in the gardens after lock-out he merely replied, "just some day;" he was quite vague about which day except when she asked "will it be today?"
and then he could always say for certain that it would not be to-day.
so she saw that he was waiting for a real good chance.
this brings us to an afternoon when the gardens were white with snow, and there was ice on the round pond, not thick enough to skate on but at least you could spoil it for tomorrow by flinging stones, and many bright little boys and girls were doing that.
when tony and his sister arrived they wanted to go straight to the pond, but their ayah said they must take a sharp walk first, and as she said this she glanced at the time-board to see when the gardens closed that night.
it read half-past five.
poor ayah!
she is the one who laughs continuously because there are so many white children in the world, but she was not to laugh much more that day.
well, they went up the baby walk and back, and when they returned to the time-board she was surprised to see that it now read five o'clock for closing time.
but she was unacquainted with the tricky ways of the fairies, and so did not see -lrb- as maimie and tony saw at once -rrb- that they had changed the hour because there was to be a ball to-night.
she said there was only time now to walk to the top of the hump and back, and as they trotted along with her she little guessed what was thrilling their little breasts.
you see the chance had come of seeing a fairy ball.
never, tony felt, could he hope for a better chance.
he had to feel this, for maimie so plainly felt it for him.
her eager eyes asked the question, "is it to-day?"
and he gasped and then nodded.
maimie slipped her hand into tony's, and hers was hot, but his was cold.
she did a very kind thing; she took off her scarf and gave it to him!
""in case you should feel cold," she whispered.
her face was aglow, but tony's was very gloomy.
as they turned on the top of the hump he whispered to her, "i'm afraid nurse would see me, so i sha'n' t be able to do it."
maimie admired him more than ever for being afraid of nothing but their ayah, when there were so many unknown terrors to fear, and she said aloud, "tony, i shall race you to the gate," and in a whisper, "then you can hide," and off they ran.
tony could always outdistance her easily, but never had she known him speed away so quickly as now, and she was sure he hurried that he might have more time to hide.
""brave, brave!"
her doting eyes were crying when she got a dreadful shock; instead of hiding, her hero had run out at the gate!
at this bitter sight maimie stopped blankly, as if all her lapful of darling treasures were suddenly spilled, and then for very disdain she could not sob; in a swell of protest against all puling cowards she ran to st. govor's well and hid in tony's stead.
when the ayah reached the gate and saw tony far in front she thought her other charge was with him and passed out.
twilight came on, and scores and hundreds of people passed out, including the last one, who always has to run for it, but maimie saw them not.
she had shut her eyes tight and glued them with passionate tears.
when she opened them something very cold ran up her legs and up her arms and dropped into her heart.
it was the stillness of the gardens.
then she heard clang, then from another part clang, then clang, clang far away.
it was the closing of the gates.
immediately the last clang had died away maimie distinctly heard a voice say, "so that's all right."
it had a wooden sound and seemed to come from above, and she looked up in time to see an elm tree stretching out its arms and yawning.
she was about to say, "i never knew you could speak!"
when a metallic voice that seemed to come from the ladle at the well remarked to the elm, "i suppose it is a bit coldish up there?"
and the elm replied, "not particularly, but you do get numb standing so long on one leg," and he flapped his arms vigorously just as the cabmen do before they drive off.
maimie was quite surprised to see that a number of other tall trees were doing the same sort of thing and she stole away to the baby walk and crouched observantly under a minorca holly which shrugged its shoulders but did not seem to mind her.
she was not in the least cold.
she was wearing a russet-coloured pelisse and had the hood over her head, so that nothing of her showed except her dear little face and her curls.
the rest of her real self was hidden far away inside so many warm garments that in shape she seemed rather like a ball.
she was about forty round the waist.
there was a good deal going on in the baby walk, when maimie arrived in time to see a magnolia and a persian lilac step over the railing and set off for a smart walk.
they moved in a jerky sort of way certainly, but that was because they used crutches.
an elderberry hobbled across the walk, and stood chatting with some young quinces, and they all had crutches.
the crutches were the sticks that are tied to young trees and shrubs.
they were quite familiar objects to maimie, but she had never known what they were for until to-night.
she peeped up the walk and saw her first fairy.
he was a street boy fairy who was running up the walk closing the weeping trees.
the way he did it was this, he pressed a spring in the trunk and they shut like umbrellas, deluging the little plants beneath with snow.
""oh, you naughty, naughty child!"
maimie cried indignantly, for she knew what it was to have a dripping umbrella about your ears.
fortunately the mischievous fellow was out of earshot, but the chrysanthemums heard her, and they all said so pointedly "hoity-toity, what is this?"
that she had to come out and show herself.
then the whole vegetable kingdom was rather puzzled what to do.
""of course it is no affair of ours," a spindle tree said after they had whispered together, "but you know quite well you ought not to be here, and perhaps our duty is to report you to the fairies; what do you think yourself?"
""i think you should not," maimie replied, which so perplexed them that they said petulantly there was no arguing with her.
""i would n't ask it of you," she assured them, "if i thought it was wrong," and of course after this they could not well carry tales.
they then said, "well-a-day," and "such is life!"
for they can be frightfully sarcastic, but she felt sorry for those of them who had no crutches, and she said good-naturedly, "before i go to the fairies" ball, i should like to take you for a walk one at a time; you can lean on me, you know."
at this they clapped their hands, and she escorted them up to the baby walk and back again, one at a time, putting an arm or a finger round the very frail, setting their leg right when it got too ridiculous, and treating the foreign ones quite as courteously as the english, though she could not understand a word they said.
they behaved well on the whole, though some whimpered that she had not taken them as far as she took nancy or grace or dorothy, and others jagged her, but it was quite unintentional, and she was too much of a lady to cry out.
so much walking tired her and she was anxious to be off to the ball, but she no longer felt afraid.
the reason she felt no more fear was that it was now night-time, and in the dark, you remember, maimie was always rather strange.
they were now loath to let her go, for, "if the fairies see you," they warned her, "they will mischief you, stab you to death or compel you to nurse their children or turn you into something tedious, like an evergreen oak."
as they said this they looked with affected pity at an evergreen oak, for in winter they are very envious of the evergreens.
""oh, la!"
replied the oak bitingly, "how deliciously cosy it is to stand here buttoned to the neck and watch you poor naked creatures shivering!"
this made them sulky though they had really brought it on themselves, and they drew for maimie a very gloomy picture of the perils that faced her if she insisted on going to the ball.
she learned from a purple filbert that the court was not in its usual good temper at present, the cause being the tantalising heart of the duke of christmas daisies.
he was an oriental fairy, very poorly of a dreadful complaint, namely, inability to love, and though he had tried many ladies in many lands he could not fall in love with one of them.
queen mab, who rules in the gardens, had been confident that her girls would bewitch him, but alas, his heart, the doctor said, remained cold.
this rather irritating doctor, who was his private physician, felt the duke's heart immediately after any lady was presented, and then always shook his bald head and murmured, "cold, quite cold!"
naturally queen mab felt disgraced, and first she tried the effect of ordering the court into tears for nine minutes, and then she blamed the cupids and decreed that they should wear fools" caps until they thawed the duke's frozen heart.
""how i should love to see the cupids in their dear little fools" caps!"
maimie cried, and away she ran to look for them very recklessly, for the cupids hate to be laughed at.
it is always easy to discover where a fairies" ball is being held, as ribbons are stretched between it and all the populous parts of the gardens, on which those invited may walk to the dance without wetting their pumps.
this night the ribbons were red and looked very pretty on the snow.
maimie walked alongside one of them for some distance without meeting anybody, but at last she saw a fairy cavalcade approaching.
to her surprise they seemed to be returning from the ball, and she had just time to hide from them by bending her knees and holding out her arms and pretending to be a garden chair.
there were six horsemen in front and six behind, in the middle walked a prim lady wearing a long train held up by two pages, and on the train, as if it were a couch, reclined a lovely girl, for in this way do aristocratic fairies travel about.
she was dressed in golden rain, but the most enviable part of her was her neck, which was blue in colour and of a velvet texture, and of course showed off her diamond necklace as no white throat could have glorified it.
the high-born fairies obtain this admired effect by pricking their skin, which lets the blue blood come through and dye them, and you can not imagine anything so dazzling unless you have seen the ladies" busts in the jewellers" windows.
maimie also noticed that the whole cavalcade seemed to be in a passion, tilting their noses higher than it can be safe for even fairies to tilt them, and she concluded that this must be another case in which the doctor had said "cold, quite cold!"
well, she followed the ribbon to a place where it became a bridge over a dry puddle into which another fairy had fallen and been unable to climb out.
at first this little damsel was afraid of maimie, who most kindly went to her aid, but soon she sat in her hand chatting gaily and explaining that her name was brownie, and that though only a poor street singer she was on her way to the ball to see if the duke would have her.
""of course," she said, "i am rather plain," and this made maimie uncomfortable, for indeed the simple little creature was almost quite plain for a fairy.
it was difficult to know what to reply.
""i see you think i have no chance," brownie said falteringly.
""i do n't say that," maimie answered politely, "of course your face is just a tiny bit homely, but --" really it was quite awkward for her.
fortunately she remembered about her father and the bazaar.
he had gone to a fashionable bazaar where all the most beautiful ladies in london were on view for half-a-crown the second day, but on his return home instead of being dissatisfied with maimie's mother he had said, "you ca n't think, my dear, what a relief it is to see a homely face again."
maimie repeated this story, and it fortified brownie tremendously, indeed she had no longer the slightest doubt that the duke would choose her.
so she scudded away up the ribbon, calling out to maimie not to follow lest the queen should mischief her.
but maimie's curiosity tugged her forward, and presently at the seven spanish chestnuts, she saw a wonderful light.
she crept forward until she was quite near it, and then she peeped from behind a tree.
the light, which was as high as your head above the ground, was composed of myriads of glow-worms all holding on to each other, and so forming a dazzling canopy over the fairy ring.
there were thousands of little people looking on, but they were in shadow and drab in colour compared to the glorious creatures within that luminous circle who were so bewilderingly bright that maimie had to wink hard all the time she looked at them.
it was amazing and even irritating to her that the duke of christmas daisies should be able to keep out of love for a moment: yet out of love his dusky grace still was: you could see it by the shamed looks of the queen and court -lrb- though they pretended not to care -rrb-, by the way darling ladies brought forward for his approval burst into tears as they were told to pass on, and by his own most dreary face.
maimie could also see the pompous doctor feeling the duke's heart and hear him give utterance to his parrot cry, and she was particularly sorry for the cupids, who stood in their fools" caps in obscure places and, every time they heard that "cold, quite cold," bowed their disgraced little heads.
she was disappointed not to see peter pan, and i may as well tell you now why he was so late that night.
it was because his boat had got wedged on the serpentine between fields of floating ice, through which he had to break a perilous passage with his trusty paddle.
the fairies had as yet scarcely missed him, for they could not dance, so heavy were their hearts.
they forget all the steps when they are sad and remember them again when they are merry.
david tells me that fairies never say "we feel happy": what they say is, "we feel dancey."
well, they were looking very undancy indeed, when sudden laughter broke out among the onlookers, caused by brownie, who had just arrived and was insisting on her right to be presented to the duke.
maimie craned forward eagerly to see how her friend fared, though she had really no hope; no one seemed to have the least hope except brownie herself who, however, was absolutely confident.
she was led before his grace, and the doctor putting a finger carelessly on the ducal heart, which for convenience sake was reached by a little trap-door in his diamond shirt, had begun to say mechanically, "cold, qui --," when he stopped abruptly.
""what's this?"
he cried, and first he shook the heart like a watch, and then put his ear to it.
""bless my soul!"
cried the doctor, and by this time of course the excitement among the spectators was tremendous, fairies fainting right and left.
everybody stared breathlessly at the duke, who was very much startled and looked as if he would like to run away.
""good gracious me!"
the doctor was heard muttering, and now the heart was evidently on fire, for he had to jerk his fingers away from it and put them in his mouth.
the suspense was awful!
then in a loud voice, and bowing low, "my lord duke," said the physician elatedly, "i have the honour to inform your excellency that your grace is in love."
you ca n't conceive the effect of it.
brownie held out her arms to the duke and he flung himself into them, the queen leapt into the arms of the lord chamberlain, and the ladies of the court leapt into the arms of her gentlemen, for it is etiquette to follow her example in everything.
thus in a single moment about fifty marriages took place, for if you leap into each other's arms it is a fairy wedding.
of course a clergyman has to be present.
how the crowd cheered and leapt!
trumpets brayed, the moon came out, and immediately a thousand couples seized hold of its rays as if they were ribbons in a may dance and waltzed in wild abandon round the fairy ring.
most gladsome sight of all, the cupids plucked the hated fools" caps from their heads and cast them high in the air.
and then maimie went and spoiled everything.
she could n't help it.
she was crazy with delight over her little friend's good fortune, so she took several steps forward and cried in an ecstasy, "oh, brownie, how splendid!"
everybody stood still, the music ceased, the lights went out, and all in the time you may take to say "oh dear!"
an awful sense of her peril came upon maimie, too late she remembered that she was a lost child in a place where no human must be between the locking and the opening of the gates, she heard the murmur of an angry multitude, she saw a thousand swords flashing for her blood, and she uttered a cry of terror and fled.
how she ran!
and all the time her eyes were starting out of her head.
many times she lay down, and then quickly jumped up and ran on again.
her little mind was so entangled in terrors that she no longer knew she was in the gardens.
the one thing she was sure of was that she must never cease to run, and she thought she was still running long after she had dropped in the figs and gone to sleep.
she thought the snowflakes falling on her face were her mother kissing her good-night.
she thought her coverlet of snow was a warm blanket, and tried to pull it over her head.
and when she heard talking through her dreams she thought it was mother bringing father to the nursery door to look at her as she slept.
but it was the fairies.
i am very glad to be able to say that they no longer desired to mischief her.
when she rushed away they had rent the air with such cries as "slay her!"
""turn her into something extremely unpleasant!"
and so on, but the pursuit was delayed while they discussed who should march in front, and this gave duchess brownie time to cast herself before the queen and demand a boon.
every bride has a right to a boon, and what she asked for was maimie's life.
""anything except that," replied queen mab sternly, and all the fairies chanted "anything except that."
but when they learned how maimie had befriended brownie and so enabled her to attend the ball to their great glory and renown, they gave three huzzas for the little human, and set off, like an army, to thank her, the court advancing in front and the canopy keeping step with it.
they traced maimie easily by her footprints in the snow.
but though they found her deep in snow in the figs, it seemed impossible to thank maimie, for they could not waken her.
they went through the form of thanking her, that is to say, the new king stood on her body and read her a long address of welcome, but she heard not a word of it.
they also cleared the snow off her, but soon she was covered again, and they saw she was in danger of perishing of cold.
""turn her into something that does not mind the cold," seemed a good suggestion of the doctor's, but the only thing they could think of that does not mind cold was a snowflake.
""and it might melt," the queen pointed out, so that idea had to be given up.
a magnificent attempt was made to carry her to a sheltered spot, but though there were so many of them she was too heavy.
by this time all the ladies were crying in their handkerchiefs, but presently the cupids had a lovely idea.
""build a house round her," they cried, and at once everybody perceived that this was the thing to do; in a moment a hundred fairy sawyers were among the branches, architects were running round maimie, measuring her; a bricklayer's yard sprang up at her feet, seventy-five masons rushed up with the foundation stone and the queen laid it, overseers were appointed to keep the boys off, scaffoldings were run up, the whole place rang with hammers and chisels and turning lathes, and by this time the roof was on and the glaziers were putting in the windows.
the house was exactly the size of maimie and perfectly lovely.
one of her arms was extended and this had bothered them for a second, but they built a verandah round it, leading to the front door.
the windows were the size of a coloured picture-book and the door rather smaller, but it would be easy for her to get out by taking off the roof.
the fairies, as is their custom, clapped their hands with delight over their cleverness, and they were all so madly in love with the little house that they could not bear to think they had finished it.
so they gave it ever so many little extra touches, and even then they added more extra touches.
for instance, two of them ran up a ladder and put on a chimney.
""now we fear it is quite finished," they sighed.
but no, for another two ran up the ladder, and tied some smoke to the chimney.
""that certainly finishes it," they cried reluctantly.
""not at all," cried a glow-worm, "if she were to wake without seeing a night-light she might be frightened, so i shall be her night-light."
""wait one moment," said a china merchant, "and i shall make you a saucer."
now alas, it was absolutely finished.
oh, dear no!
""gracious me," cried a brass manufacturer, "there's no handle on the door," and he put one on.
an ironmonger added a scraper and an old lady ran up with a door-mat.
carpenters arrived with a water-butt, and the painters insisted on painting it.
finished at last!
""finished!
how can it be finished," the plumber demanded scornfully, "before hot and cold are put in?"
and he put in hot and cold.
then an army of gardeners arrived with fairy carts and spades and seeds and bulbs and forcing-houses, and soon they had a flower garden to the right of the verandah and a vegetable garden to the left, and roses and clematis on the walls of the house, and in less time than five minutes all these dear things were in full bloom.
oh, how beautiful the little house was now!
but it was at last finished true as true, and they had to leave it and return to the dance.
they all kissed their hands to it as they went away, and the last to go was brownie.
she stayed a moment behind the others to drop a pleasant dream down the chimney.
all through the night the exquisite little house stood there in the figs taking care of maimie, and she never knew.
she slept until the dream was quite finished and woke feeling deliciously cosy just as morning was breaking from its egg, and then she almost fell asleep again, and then she called out, "tony," for she thought she was at home in the nursery.
as tony made no answer, she sat up, whereupon her head hit the roof, and it opened like the lid of a box, and to her bewilderment she saw all around her the kensington gardens lying deep in snow.
as she was not in the nursery she wondered whether this was really herself, so she pinched her cheeks, and then she knew it was herself, and this reminded her that she was in the middle of a great adventure.
she remembered now everything that had happened to her from the closing of the gates up to her running away from the fairies, but however, she asked herself, had she got into this funny place?
she stepped out by the roof, right over the garden, and then she saw the dear house in which she had passed the night.
it so entranced her that she could think of nothing else.
""oh, you darling, oh, you sweet, oh, you love!"
she cried.
perhaps a human voice frightened the little house, or maybe it now knew that its work was done, for no sooner had maimie spoken than it began to grow smaller; it shrank so slowly that she could scarce believe it was shrinking, yet she soon knew that it could not contain her now.
it always remained as complete as ever, but it became smaller and smaller, and the garden dwindled at the same time, and the snow crept closer, lapping house and garden up.
now the house was the size of a little dog's kennel, and now of a noah's ark, but still you could see the smoke and the door-handle and the roses on the wall, every one complete.
the glow-worm fight was waning too, but it was still there.
""darling, loveliest, do n't go!"
maimie cried, falling on her knees, for the little house was now the size of a reel of thread, but still quite complete.
but as she stretched out her arms imploringly the snow crept up on all sides until it met itself, and where the little house had been was now one unbroken expanse of snow.
maimie stamped her foot naughtily, and was putting her fingers to her eyes, when she heard a kind voice say, "do n't cry, pretty human, do n't cry," and then she turned round and saw a beautiful little naked boy regarding her wistfully.
she knew at once that he must be peter pan.
lock-out time it is frightfully difficult to know much about the fairies, and almost the only thing known for certain is that there are fairies wherever there are children.
long ago children were forbidden the gardens, and at that time there was not a fairy in the place; then the children were admitted, and the fairies came trooping in that very evening.
they ca n't resist following the children, but you seldom see them, partly because they live in the daytime behind the railings, where you are not allowed to go, and also partly because they are so cunning.
they are not a bit cunning after lock-out, but until lock-out, my word!
when you were a bird you knew the fairies pretty well, and you remember a good deal about them in your babyhood, which it is a great pity you ca n't write down, for gradually you forget, and i have heard of children who declared that they had never once seen a fairy.
very likely if they said this in the kensington gardens, they were standing looking at a fairy all the time.
the reason they were cheated was that she pretended to be something else.
this is one of their best tricks.
they usually pretend to be flowers, because the court sits in the fairies" basin, and there are so many flowers there, and all along the baby walk, that a flower is the thing least likely to attract attention.
they dress exactly like flowers, and change with the seasons, putting on white when lilies are in and blue for blue-bells, and so on.
they like crocus and hyacinth time best of all, as they are partial to a bit of colour, but tulips -lrb- except white ones, which are the fairy-cradles -rrb- they consider garish, and they sometimes put off dressing like tulips for days, so that the beginning of the tulip weeks is almost the best time to catch them.
when they think you are not looking they skip along pretty lively, but if you look and they fear there is no time to hide, they stand quite still, pretending to be flowers.
then, after you have passed without knowing that they were fairies, they rush home and tell their mothers they have had such an adventure.
the fairy basin, you remember, is all covered with ground-ivy -lrb- from which they make their castor-oil -rrb-, with flowers growing in it here and there.
most of them really are flowers, but some of them are fairies.
you never can be sure of them, but a good plan is to walk by looking the other way, and then turn round sharply.
another good plan, which david and i sometimes follow, is to stare them down.
after a long time they ca n't help winking, and then you know for certain that they are fairies.
there are also numbers of them along the baby walk, which is a famous gentle place, as spots frequented by fairies are called.
once twenty-four of them had an extraordinary adventure.
they were a girls" school out for a walk with the governess, and all wearing hyacinth gowns, when she suddenly put her finger to her mouth, and then they all stood still on an empty bed and pretended to be hyacinths.
unfortunately, what the governess had heard was two gardeners coming to plant new flowers in that very bed.
they were wheeling a handcart with flowers in it, and were quite surprised to find the bed occupied.
""pity to lift them hyacinths," said the one man.
""duke's orders," replied the other, and, having emptied the cart, they dug up the boarding-school and put the poor, terrified things in it in five rows.
of course, neither the governess nor the girls dare let on that they were fairies, so they were carted far away to a potting-shed, out of which they escaped in the night without their shoes, but there was a great row about it among the parents, and the school was ruined.
as for their houses, it is no use looking for them, because they are the exact opposite of our houses.
you can see our houses by day but you ca n't see them by dark.
well, you can see their houses by dark, but you ca n't see them by day, for they are the colour of night, and i never heard of anyone yet who could see night in the daytime.
this does not mean that they are black, for night has its colours just as day has, but ever so much brighter.
their blues and reds and greens are like ours with a light behind them.
the palace is entirely built of many-coloured glasses, and is quite the loveliest of all royal residences, but the queen sometimes complains because the common people will peep in to see what she is doing.
they are very inquisitive folk, and press quite hard against the glass, and that is why their noses are mostly snubby.
the streets are miles long and very twisty, and have paths on each side made of bright worsted.
the birds used to steal the worsted for their nests, but a policeman has been appointed to hold on at the other end.
one of the great differences between the fairies and us is that they never do anything useful.
when the first baby laughed for the first time, his laugh broke into a million pieces, and they all went skipping about.
that was the beginning of fairies.
they look tremendously busy, you know, as if they had not a moment to spare, but if you were to ask them what they are doing, they could not tell you in the least.
they are frightfully ignorant, and everything they do is make-believe.
they have a postman, but he never calls except at christmas with his little box, and though they have beautiful schools, nothing is taught in them; the youngest child being chief person is always elected mistress, and when she has called the roll, they all go out for a walk and never come back.
it is a very noticeable thing that, in fairy families, the youngest is always chief person, and usually becomes a prince or princess, and children remember this, and think it must be so among humans also, and that is why they are often made uneasy when they come upon their mother furtively putting new frills on the basinette.
you have probably observed that your baby-sister wants to do all sorts of things that your mother and her nurse want her not to do: to stand up at sitting-down time, and to sit down at standing-up time, for instance, or to wake up when she should fall asleep, or to crawl on the floor when she is wearing her best frock, and so on, and perhaps you put this down to naughtiness.
but it is not; it simply means that she is doing as she has seen the fairies do; she begins by following their ways, and it takes about two years to get her into the human ways.
her fits of passion, which are awful to behold, and are usually called teething, are no such thing; they are her natural exasperation, because we do n't understand her, though she is talking an intelligible language.
she is talking fairy.
the reason mothers and nurses know what her remarks mean, before other people know, as that "guch" means "give it to me at once," while "wa" is "why do you wear such a funny hat?"
is because, mixing so much with babies, they have picked up a little of the fairy language.
of late david has been thinking back hard about the fairy tongue, with his hands clutching his temples, and he has remembered a number of their phrases which i shall tell you some day if i do n't forget.
he had heard them in the days when he was a thrush, and though i suggested to him that perhaps it is really bird language he is remembering, he says not, for these phrases are about fun and adventures, and the birds talked of nothing but nest-building.
he distinctly remembers that the birds used to go from spot to spot like ladies at shop-windows, looking at the different nests and saying, "not my colour, my dear," and "how would that do with a soft lining?"
and "but will it wear?"
and "what hideous trimming!"
and so on.
the fairies are exquisite dancers, and that is why one of the first things the baby does is to sign to you to dance to him and then to cry when you do it.
they hold their great balls in the open air, in what is called a fairy-ring.
for weeks afterward you can see the ring on the grass.
it is not there when they begin, but they make it by waltzing round and round.
sometimes you will find mushrooms inside the ring, and these are fairy chairs that the servants have forgotten to clear away.
the chairs and the rings are the only tell-tale marks these little people leave behind them, and they would remove even these were they not so fond of dancing that they toe it till the very moment of the opening of the gates.
david and i once found a fairy-ring quite warm.
but there is also a way of finding out about the ball before it takes place.
you know the boards which tell at what time the gardens are to close to-day.
well, these tricky fairies sometimes slyly change the board on a ball night, so that it says the gardens are to close at six-thirty for instance, instead of at seven.
this enables them to get begun half an hour earlier.
if on such a night we could remain behind in the gardens, as the famous maimie mannering did, we might see delicious sights, hundreds of lovely fairies hastening to the ball, the married ones wearing their wedding-rings round their waists, the gentlemen, all in uniform, holding up the ladies" trains, and linkmen running in front carrying winter cherries, which are the fairy-lanterns, the cloakroom where they put on their silver slippers and get a ticket for their wraps, the flowers streaming up from the baby walk to look on, and always welcome because they can lend a pin, the supper-table, with queen mab at the head of it, and behind her chair the lord chamberlain, who carries a dandelion on which he blows when her majesty wants to know the time.
the table-cloth varies according to the seasons, and in may it is made of chestnut-blossom.
the way the fairy-servants do is this: the men, scores of them, climb up the trees and shake the branches, and the blossom falls like snow.
then the lady servants sweep it together by whisking their skirts until it is exactly like a table-cloth, and that is how they get their table-cloth.
they have real glasses and real wine of three kinds, namely, blackthorn wine, berberris wine, and cowslip wine, and the queen pours out, but the bottles are so heavy that she just pretends to pour out.
there is bread and butter to begin with, of the size of a threepenny bit; and cakes to end with, and they are so small that they have no crumbs.
the fairies sit round on mushrooms, and at first they are very well-behaved and always cough off the table, and so on, but after a bit they are not so well-behaved and stick their fingers into the butter, which is got from the roots of old trees, and the really horrid ones crawl over the table-cloth chasing sugar or other delicacies with their tongues.
when the queen sees them doing this she signs to the servants to wash up and put away, and then everybody adjourns to the dance, the queen walking in front while the lord chamberlain walks behind her, carrying two little pots, one of which contains the juice of wall-flower and the other the juice of solomon's seals.
wall-flower juice is good for reviving dancers who fall to the ground in a fit, and solomon's seals juice is for bruises.
they bruise very easily and when peter plays faster and faster they foot it till they fall down in fits.
for, as you know without my telling you, peter pan is the fairies" orchestra.
he sits in the middle of the ring, and they would never dream of having a smart dance nowadays without him.
""p. p." is written on the corner of the invitation-cards sent out by all really good families.
they are grateful little people, too, and at the princess's coming-of-age ball -lrb- they come of age on their second birthday and have a birthday every month -rrb- they gave him the wish of his heart.
the way it was done was this.
the queen ordered him to kneel, and then said that for playing so beautifully she would give him the wish of his heart.
then they all gathered round peter to hear what was the wish of his heart, but for a long time he hesitated, not being certain what it was himself.
""if i chose to go back to mother," he asked at last, "could you give me that wish?"
now this question vexed them, for were he to return to his mother they should lose his music, so the queen tilted her nose contemptuously and said, "pooh, ask for a much bigger wish than that."
""is that quite a little wish?"
he inquired.
""as little as this," the queen answered, putting her hands near each other.
""what size is a big wish?"
he asked.
she measured it off on her skirt and it was a very handsome length.
then peter reflected and said, "well, then, i think i shall have two little wishes instead of one big one."
of course, the fairies had to agree, though his cleverness rather shocked them, and he said that his first wish was to go to his mother, but with the right to return to the gardens if he found her disappointing.
his second wish he would hold in reserve.
they tried to dissuade him, and even put obstacles in the way.
""i can give you the power to fly to her house," the queen said, "but i ca n't open the door for you."
""the window i flew out at will be open," peter said confidently.
""mother always keeps it open in the hope that i may fly back.
""how do you know?"
they asked, quite surprised, and, really, peter could not explain how he knew.
""i just do know," he said.
so as he persisted in his wish, they had to grant it.
the way they gave him power to fly was this: they all tickled him on the shoulder, and soon he felt a funny itching in that part and then up he rose higher and higher and flew away out of the gardens and over the house-tops.
it was so delicious that instead of flying straight to his old home he skimmed away over st. paul's to the crystal palace and back by the river and regent's park, and by the time he reached his mother's window he had quite made up his mind that his second wish should be to become a bird.
the window was wide open, just as he knew it would be, and in he fluttered, and there was his mother lying asleep.
peter alighted softly on the wooden rail at the foot of the bed and had a good look at her.
she lay with her head on her hand, and the hollow in the pillow was like a nest lined with her brown wavy hair.
he remembered, though he had long forgotten it, that she always gave her hair a holiday at night.
how sweet the frills of her night-gown were.
he was very glad she was such a pretty mother.
but she looked sad, and he knew why she looked sad.
one of her arms moved as if it wanted to go round something, and he knew what it wanted to go round.
""oh, mother," said peter to himself, "if you just knew who is sitting on the rail at the foot of the bed."
very gently he patted the little mound that her feet made, and he could see by her face that she liked it.
he knew he had but to say "mother" ever so softly, and she would wake up.
they always wake up at once if it is you that says their name.
then she would give such a joyous cry and squeeze him tight.
how nice that would be to him, but oh, how exquisitely delicious it would be to her.
that i am afraid is how peter regarded it.
in returning to his mother he never doubted that he was giving her the greatest treat a woman can have.
nothing can be more splendid, he thought, than to have a little boy of your own.
how proud of him they are; and very right and proper, too.
but why does peter sit so long on the rail, why does he not tell his mother that he has come back?
i quite shrink from the truth, which is that he sat there in two minds.
sometimes he looked longingly at his mother, and sometimes he looked longingly at the window.
certainly it would be pleasant to be her boy again, but, on the other hand, what times those had been in the gardens!
was he so sure that he would enjoy wearing clothes again?
he popped off the bed and opened some drawers to have a look at his old garments.
they were still there, but he could not remember how you put them on.
the socks, for instance, were they worn on the hands or on the feet?
he was about to try one of them on his hand, when he had a great adventure.
perhaps the drawer had creaked; at any rate, his mother woke up, for he heard her say "peter," as if it was the most lovely word in the language.
he remained sitting on the floor and held his breath, wondering how she knew that he had come back.
if she said "peter" again, he meant to cry "mother" and run to her.
but she spoke no more, she made little moans only, and when next he peeped at her she was once more asleep, with tears on her face.
it made peter very miserable, and what do you think was the first thing he did?
sitting on the rail at the foot of the bed, he played a beautiful lullaby to his mother on his pipe.
he had made it up himself out of the way she said "peter," and he never stopped playing until she looked happy.
he thought this so clever of him that he could scarcely resist wakening her to hear her say, "oh, peter, how exquisitely you play."
however, as she now seemed comfortable, he again cast looks at the window.
you must not think that he meditated flying away and never coming back.
he had quite decided to be his mother's boy, but hesitated about beginning to-night.
it was the second wish which troubled him.
he no longer meant to make it a wish to be a bird, but not to ask for a second wish seemed wasteful, and, of course, he could not ask for it without returning to the fairies.
also, if he put off asking for his wish too long it might go bad.
he asked himself if he had not been hard-hearted to fly away without saying good-bye to solomon.
""i should like awfully to sail in my boat just once more," he said wistfully to his sleeping mother.
he quite argued with her as if she could hear him.
""it would be so splendid to tell the birds of this adventure," he said coaxingly.
""i promise to come back," he said solemnly and meant it, too.
and in the end, you know, he flew away.
twice he came back from the window, wanting to kiss his mother, but he feared the delight of it might waken her, so at last he played her a lovely kiss on his pipe, and then he flew back to the gardens.
many nights and even months passed before he asked the fairies for his second wish; and i am not sure that i quite know why he delayed so long.
one reason was that he had so many good-byes to say, not only to his particular friends, but to a hundred favourite spots.
then he had his last sail, and his very last sail, and his last sail of all, and so on.
again, a number of farewell feasts were given in his honour; and another comfortable reason was that, after all, there was no hurry, for his mother would never weary of waiting for him.
this last reason displeased old solomon, for it was an encouragement to the birds to procrastinate.
solomon had several excellent mottoes for keeping them at their work, such as "never put off laying to-day, because you can lay to-morrow," and "in this world there are no second chances," and yet here was peter gaily putting off and none the worse for it.
the birds pointed this out to each other, and fell into lazy habits.
but, mind you, though peter was so slow in going back to his mother, he was quite decided to go back.
the best proof of this was his caution with the fairies.
they were most anxious that he should remain in the gardens to play to them, and to bring this to pass they tried to trick him into making such a remark as "i wish the grass was not so wet," and some of them danced out of time in the hope that he might cry, "i do wish you would keep time!"
then they would have said that this was his second wish.
but he smoked their design, and though on occasions he began, "i wish --" he always stopped in time.
so when at last he said to them bravely, "i wish now to go back to mother for ever and always," they had to tickle his shoulder and let him go.
he went in a hurry in the end because he had dreamt that his mother was crying, and he knew what was the great thing she cried for, and that a hug from her splendid peter would quickly make her to smile.
oh, he felt sure of it, and so eager was he to be nestling in her arms that this time he flew straight to the window, which was always to be open for him.
but the window was closed, and there were iron bars on it, and peering inside he saw his mother sleeping peacefully with her arm round another little boy.
peter called, "mother!
mother!"
but she heard him not; in vain he beat his little limbs against the iron bars.
he had to fly back, sobbing, to the gardens, and he never saw his dear again.
what a glorious boy he had meant to be to her.
ah, peter, we who have made the great mistake, how differently we should all act at the second chance.
but solomon was right; there is no second chance, not for most of us.
when we reach the window it is lock-out time.
_book_title_: james_matthew_barrie___peter_and_wendy.txt.out
chapter i peter breaks through all children, except one, grow up.
they soon know that they will grow up, and the way wendy knew was this.
one day when she was two years old she was playing in a garden, and she plucked another flower and ran with it to her mother.
i suppose she must have looked rather delightful, for mrs. darling put her hand to her heart and cried, "oh, why ca n't you remain like this for ever!"
this was all that passed between them on the subject, but henceforth wendy knew that she must grow up.
you always know after you are two.
two is the beginning of the end.
of course they lived at 14, and until wendy came her mother was the chief one.
she was a lovely lady, with a romantic mind and such a sweet mocking mouth.
her romantic mind was like the tiny boxes, one within the other, that come from the puzzling east, however many you discover there is always one more; and her sweet mocking mouth had one kiss on it that wendy could never get, though there it was, perfectly conspicuous in the right-hand corner.
the way mr. darling won her was this: the many gentlemen who had been boys when she was a girl discovered simultaneously that they loved her, and they all ran to her house to propose to her except mr. darling, who took a cab and nipped in first, and so he got her.
he got all of her, except the innermost box and the kiss.
he never knew about the box, and in time he gave up trying for the kiss.
wendy thought napoleon could have got it, but i can picture him trying, and then going off in a passion, slamming the door.
mr. darling used to boast to wendy that her mother not only loved him but respected him.
he was one of those deep ones who know about stocks and shares.
of course no one really knows, but he quite seemed to know, and he often said stocks were up and shares were down in a way that would have made any woman respect him.
mrs. darling was married in white, and at first she kept the books perfectly, almost gleefully, as if it were a game, not so much as a brussels sprout was missing; but by and by whole cauliflowers dropped out, and instead of them there were pictures of babies without faces.
she drew them when she should have been totting up.
they were mrs. darling's guesses.
wendy came first, then john, then michael.
for a week or two after wendy came it was doubtful whether they would be able to keep her, as she was another mouth to feed.
mr. darling was frightfully proud of her, but he was very honourable, and he sat on the edge of mrs. darling's bed, holding her hand and calculating expenses, while she looked at him imploringly.
she wanted to risk it, come what might, but that was not his way; his way was with a pencil and a piece of paper, and if she confused him with suggestions he had to begin at the beginning again.
"now do n't interrupt," he would beg of her."
i have one pound seventeen here, and two and six at the office; i can cut off my coffee at the office, say ten shillings, making two nine and six, with your eighteen and three makes three nine seven, with five naught naught in my cheque-book makes eight nine seven, -- who is that moving?
-- eight nine seven, dot and carry seven -- do n't speak, my own -- and the pound you lent to that man who came to the door -- quiet, child -- dot and carry child -- there, you've done it!
-- did i say nine nine seven?
yes, i said nine nine seven; the question is, can we try it for a year on nine nine seven?"
"of course we can, george," she cried.
but she was prejudiced in wendy's favour, and he was really the grander character of the two.
"remember mumps," he warned her almost threateningly, and off he went again.
"mumps one pound, that is what i have put down, but i daresay it will be more like thirty shillings -- do n't speak -- measles one five, german measles half a guinea, makes two fifteen six -- do n't waggle your finger -- whooping-cough, say fifteen shillings" -- and so on it went, and it added up differently each time; but at last wendy just got through, with mumps reduced to twelve six, and the two kinds of measles treated as one.
there was the same excitement over john, and michael had even a narrower squeak; but both were kept, and soon you might have seen the three of them going in a row to miss fulsom's kindergarten school, accompanied by their nurse.
mrs. darling loved to have everything just so, and mr. darling had a passion for being exactly like his neighbours; so, of course, they had a nurse.
as they were poor, owing to the amount of milk the children drank, this nurse was a prim newfoundland dog, called nana, who had belonged to no one in particular until the darlings engaged her.
she had always thought children important, however, and the darlings had become acquainted with her in kensington gardens, where she spent most of her spare time peeping into perambulators, and was much hated by careless nursemaids, whom she followed to their homes and complained of to their mistresses.
she proved to be quite a treasure of a nurse.
how thorough she was at bath-time; and up at any moment of the night if one of her charges made the slightest cry.
of course her kennel was in the nursery.
she had a genius for knowing when a cough is a thing to have no patience with and when it needs stocking round your throat.
she believed to her last day in old-fashioned remedies like rhubarb leaf, and made sounds of contempt over all this new-fangled talk about germs, and so on.
it was a lesson in propriety to see her escorting the children to school, walking sedately by their side when they were well behaved, and butting them back into line if they strayed.
on john's footer days she never once forgot his sweater, and she usually carried an umbrella in her mouth in case of rain.
there is a room in the basement of miss fulsom's school where the nurses wait.
they sat on forms, while nana lay on the floor, but that was the only difference.
they affected to ignore her as of an inferior social status to themselves, and she despised their light talk.
she resented visits to the nursery from mrs. darling's friends, but if they did come she first whipped off michael's pinafore and put him into the one with blue braiding, and smoothed out wendy and made a dash at john's hair.
no nursery could possibly have been conducted more correctly, and mr. darling knew it, yet he sometimes wondered uneasily whether the neighbours talked.
he had his position in the city to consider.
nana also troubled him in another way.
he had sometimes a feeling that she did not admire him."
i know she admires you tremendously, george," mrs. darling would assure him, and then she would sign to the children to be specially nice to father.
lovely dances followed, in which the only other servant, liza, was sometimes allowed to join.
such a midget she looked in her long skirt and maid's cap, though she had sworn, when engaged, that she would never see ten again.
the gaiety of those romps!
and gayest of all was mrs. darling, who would pirouette so wildly that all you could see of her was the kiss, and then if you had dashed at her you might have got it.
there never was a simpler happier family until the coming of peter pan.
mrs. darling first heard of peter when she was tidying up her children's minds.
it is the nightly custom of every good mother after her children are asleep to rummage in their minds and put things straight for next morning, repacking into their proper places the many articles that have wandered during the day.
if you could keep awake -lrb- but of course you ca n't -rrb- you would see your own mother doing this, and you would find it very interesting to watch her.
it is quite like tidying up drawers.
you would see her on her knees, i expect, lingering humorously over some of your contents, wondering where on earth you had picked this thing up, making discoveries sweet and not so sweet, pressing this to her cheek as if it were as nice as a kitten, and hurriedly stowing that out of sight.
when you wake in the morning, the naughtinesses and evil passions with which you went to bed have been folded up small and placed at the bottom of your mind; and on the top, beautifully aired, are spread out your prettier thoughts, ready for you to put on.
i do n't know whether you have ever seen a map of a person's mind.
doctors sometimes draw maps of other parts of you, and your own map can become intensely interesting, but catch them trying to draw a map of a child's mind, which is not only confused, but keeps going round all the time.
there are zigzag lines on it, just like your temperature on a card, and these are probably roads in the island; for the neverland is always more or less an island, with astonishing splashes of colour here and there, and coral reefs and rakish-looking craft in the offing, and savages and lonely lairs, and gnomes who are mostly tailors, and caves through which a river runs, and princes with six elder brothers, and a hut fast going to decay, and one very small old lady with a hooked nose.
it would be an easy map if that were all; but there is also first day at school, religion, fathers, the round pond, needlework, murders, hangings, verbs that take the dative, chocolate pudding day, getting into braces, say ninety-nine, three-pence for pulling out your tooth yourself, and so on; and either these are part of the island or they are another map showing through, and it is all rather confusing, especially as nothing will stand still.
of course the neverlands vary a good deal.
john's, for instance, had a lagoon with flamingoes flying over it at which john was shooting, while michael, who was very small, had a flamingo with lagoons flying over it.
john lived in a boat turned upside down on the sands, michael in a wigwam, wendy in a house of leaves deftly sewn together.
john had no friends, michael had friends at night, wendy had a pet wolf forsaken by its parents; but on the whole the neverlands have a family resemblance, and if they stood still in a row you could say of them that they have each other's nose, and so forth.
on these magic shores children at play are for ever beaching their coracles.
we too have been there; we can still hear the sound of the surf, though we shall land no more.
of all delectable islands the neverland is the snuggest and most compact; not large and sprawly, you know, with tedious distances between one adventure and another, but nicely crammed.
when you play at it by day with the chairs and table-cloth, it is not in the least alarming, but in the two minutes before you go to sleep it becomes very nearly real.
that is why there are night-lights.
occasionally in her travels through her children's minds mrs. darling found things she could not understand, and of these quite the most perplexing was the word peter.
she knew of no peter, and yet he was here and there in john and michael's minds, while wendy's began to be scrawled all over with him.
the name stood out in bolder letters than any of the other words, and as mrs. darling gazed she felt that it had an oddly cocky appearance.
"yes, he is rather cocky," wendy admitted with regret.
her mother had been questioning her.
"but who is he, my pet?"
"he is peter pan, you know, mother."
at first mrs. darling did not know, but after thinking back into her childhood she just remembered a peter pan who was said to live with the fairies.
there were odd stories about him; as that when children died he went part of the way with them, so that they should not be frightened.
she had believed in him at the time, but now that she was married and full of sense she quite doubted whether there was any such person.
"besides," she said to wendy, "he would be grown up by this time."
"oh no, he is n't grown up," wendy assured her confidently, "and he is just my size."
she meant that he was her size in both mind and body; she did n't know how she knew it, she just knew it.
mrs. darling consulted mr. darling, but he smiled pooh-pooh.
"mark my words," he said, "it is some nonsense nana has been putting into their heads; just the sort of idea a dog would have.
leave it alone, and it will blow over."
but it would not blow over; and soon the troublesome boy gave mrs. darling quite a shock.
children have the strangest adventures without being troubled by them.
for instance, they may remember to mention, a week after the event happened, that when they were in the wood they met their dead father and had a game with him.
it was in this casual way that wendy one morning made a disquieting revelation.
some leaves of a tree had been found on the nursery floor, which certainly were not there when the children went to bed, and mrs. darling was puzzling over them when wendy said with a tolerant smile: "i do believe it is that peter again!"
"whatever do you mean, wendy?"
"it is so naughty of him not to wipe," wendy said, sighing.
she was a tidy child.
she explained in quite a matter-of-fact way that she thought peter sometimes came to the nursery in the night and sat on the foot of her bed and played on his pipes to her.
unfortunately she never woke, so she did n't know how she knew, she just knew.
"what nonsense you talk, precious.
no one can get into the house without knocking.'"
i think he comes in by the window," she said.
"my love, it is three floors up."
"were not the leaves at the foot of the window, mother?"
it was quite true; the leaves had been found very near the window.
mrs. darling did not know what to think, for it all seemed so natural to wendy that you could not dismiss it by saying she had been dreaming.
"my child," the mother cried, "why did you not tell me of this before?'"
i forgot," said wendy lightly.
she was in a hurry to get her breakfast.
oh, surely she must have been dreaming.
but, on the other hand, there were the leaves.
mrs. darling examined them carefully; they were skeleton leaves, but she was sure they did not come from any tree that grew in england.
she crawled about the floor, peering at it with a candle for marks of a strange foot.
she rattled the poker up the chimney and tapped the walls.
she let down a tape from the window to the pavement, and it was a sheer drop of thirty feet, without so much as a spout to climb up by.
certainly wendy had been dreaming.
but wendy had not been dreaming, as the very next night showed, the night on which the extraordinary adventures of these children may be said to have begun.
on the night we speak of all the children were once more in bed.
it happened to be nana's evening off, and mrs. darling had bathed them and sung to them till one by one they had let go her hand and slid away into the land of sleep.
all were looking so safe and cosy that she smiled at her fears now and sat down tranquilly by the fire to sew.
it was something for michael, who on his birthday was getting into shirts.
the fire was warm, however, and the nursery dimly lit by three night-lights, and presently the sewing lay on mrs. darling's lap.
then her head nodded, oh, so gracefully.
she was asleep.
look at the four of them, wendy and michael over there, john here, and mrs. darling by the fire.
there should have been a fourth night-light.
while she slept she had a dream.
she dreamt that the neverland had come too near and that a strange boy had broken through from it.
he did not alarm her, for she thought she had seen him before in the faces of many women who have no children.
perhaps he is to be found in the faces of some mothers also.
but in her dream he had rent the film that obscures the neverland, and she saw wendy and john and michael peeping through the gap.
the dream by itself would have been a trifle, but while she was dreaming the window of the nursery blew open, and a boy did drop on the floor.
he was accompanied by a strange light, no bigger than your fist, which darted about the room like a living thing; and i think it must have been this light that wakened mrs. darling.
she started up with a cry, and saw the boy, and somehow she knew at once that he was peter pan.
if you or i or wendy had been there we should have seen that he was very like mrs. darling's kiss.
he was a lovely boy, clad in skeleton leaves and the juices that ooze out of trees; but the most entrancing thing about him was that he had all his first teeth.
when he saw she was a grown-up, he gnashed the little pearls at her.
chapter ii the shadow mrs. darling screamed, and, as if in answer to a bell, the door opened, and nana entered, returned from her evening out.
she growled and sprang at the boy, who leapt lightly through the window.
again mrs. darling screamed, this time in distress for him, for she thought he was killed, and she ran down into the street to look for his little body, but it was not there; and she looked up, and in the black night she could see nothing but what she thought was a shooting star.
she returned to the nursery, and found nana with something in her mouth, which proved to be the boy's shadow.
as he leapt at the window nana had closed it quickly, too late to catch him, but his shadow had not had time to get out; slam went the window and snapped it off.
you may be sure mrs. darling examined the shadow carefully, but it was quite the ordinary kind.
nana had no doubt of what was the best thing to do with this shadow.
she hung it out at the window, meaning "he is sure to come back for it; let us put it where he can get it easily without disturbing the children."
but unfortunately mrs. darling could not leave it hanging out at the window; it looked so like the washing and lowered the whole tone of the house.
she thought of showing it to mr. darling, but he was totting up winter greatcoats for john and michael, with a wet towel round his head to keep his brain clear, and it seemed a shame to trouble him; besides, she knew exactly what he would say: "it all comes of having a dog for a nurse."
she decided to roll the shadow up and put it away carefully in a drawer, until a fitting opportunity came for telling her husband.
ah me!
the opportunity came a week later, on that never-to-be-forgotten friday.
of course it was a friday."
i ought to have been specially careful on a friday," she used to say afterwards to her husband, while perhaps nana was on the other side of her, holding her hand.
"no, no," mr. darling always said," i am responsible for it all.
i, george darling, did it.
mea culpa, mea culpa.
' he had had a classical education.
they sat thus night after night recalling that fatal friday, till every detail of it was stamped on their brains and came through on the other side like the faces on a bad coinage.
"if only i had not accepted that invitation to dine at 27," mrs. darling said.
"if only i had not poured my medicine into nana's bowl," said mr. darling.
"if only i had pretended to like the medicine," was what nana's wet eyes said.
"my liking for parties, george."
"my fatal gift of humour, dearest."
"my touchiness about trifles, dear master and mistress."
then one or more of them would break down altogether; nana at the thought, "it's true, it's true, they ought not to have had a dog for a nurse."
many a time it was mr. darling who put the handkerchief to nana's eyes.
"that fiend!"
mr. darling would cry, and nana's bark was the echo of it, but mrs. darling never upbraided peter; there was something in the right-hand corner of her mouth that wanted her not to call peter names.
they would sit there in the empty nursery, recalling fondly every smallest detail of that dreadful evening.
it had begun so uneventfully, so precisely like a hundred other evenings, with nana putting on the water for michael's bath and carrying him to it on her back."
i wo n't go to bed," he had shouted, like one who still believed that he had the last word on the subject," i wo n't, i wo n't.
nana, it is n't six o'clock yet.
oh dear, oh dear, i sha n't love you any more, nana.
i tell you i wo n't be bathed, i wo n't, i wo n't!"
then mrs. darling had come in, wearing her white evening-gown.
she had dressed early because wendy so loved to see her in her evening-gown, with the necklace george had given her.
she was wearing wendy's bracelet on her arm; she had asked for the loan of it.
wendy so loved to lend her bracelet to her mother.
she had found her two older children playing at being herself and father on the occasion of wendy's birth, and john was saying: "i am happy to inform you, mrs. darling, that you are now a mother," in just such a tone as mr. darling himself may have used on the real occasion.
wendy had danced with joy, just as the real mrs. darling must have done.
then john was born, with the extra pomp that he conceived due to the birth of a male, and michael came from his bath to ask to be born also, but john said brutally that they did not want any more.
michael had nearly cried.
"nobody wants me," he said, and of course the lady in evening-dress could not stand that."
i do," she said," i so want a third child."
"boy or girl?"
asked michael, not too hopefully.
"boy."
then he had leapt into her arms.
such a little thing for mr. and mrs. darling and nana to recall now, but not so little if that was to be michael's last night in the nursery.
they go on with their recollections.
"it was then that i rushed in like a tornado, was n't it?"
mr. darling would say, scorning himself; and indeed he had been like a tornado.
perhaps there was some excuse for him.
he, too, had been dressing for the party, and all had gone well with him until he came to his tie.
it is an astounding thing to have to tell, but this man, though he knew about stocks and shares, had no real mastery of his tie.
sometimes the thing yielded to him without a contest, but there were occasions when it would have been better for the house if he had swallowed his pride and used a made-up tie.
this was such an occasion.
he came rushing into the nursery with the crumpled little brute of a tie in his hand.
"why, what is the matter, father dear?"
"matter!"
he yelled; he really yelled.
"this tie, it will not tie."
he became dangerously sarcastic.
"not round my neck!
round the bed-post!
oh yes, twenty times have i made it up round the bed-post, but round my neck, no!
oh dear no!
begs to be excused!"
he thought mrs. darling was not sufficiently impressed, and he went on sternly," i warn you of this, mother, that unless this tie is round my neck we do n't go out to dinner to-night, and if i do n't go out to dinner to-night, i never go to the office again, and if i do n't go to the office again, you and i starve, and our children will be flung into the streets."
even then mrs. darling was placid.
"let me try, dear," she said, and indeed that was what he had come to ask her to do; and with her nice cool hands she tied his tie for him, while the children stood around to see their fate decided.
some men would have resented her being able to do it so easily, but mr. darling was far too fine a nature for that; he thanked her carelessly, at once forgot his rage, and in another moment was dancing round the room with michael on his back.
"how wildly we romped!"
says mrs. darling now, recalling it.
"our last romp!"
mr. darling groaned."
o george, do you remember michael suddenly said to me, "how did you get to know me, mother?"'"
i remember!"
"they were rather sweet, do n't you think, george?"
"and they were ours, ours, and now they are gone."
the romp had ended with the appearance of nana, and most unluckily mr. darling collided against her, covering his trousers with hairs.
they were not only new trousers, but they were the first he had ever had with braid on them, and he had to bite his lip to prevent the tears coming.
of course mrs. darling brushed him, but he began to talk again about its being a mistake to have a dog for a nurse.
"george, nana is a treasure."
"no doubt, but i have an uneasy feeling at times that she looks upon the children as puppies."
"oh no, dear one, i feel sure she knows they have souls.'"
i wonder," mr. darling said thoughtfully," i wonder."
it was an opportunity, his wife felt, for telling him about the boy.
at first he pooh-poohed the story, but he became thoughtful when she showed him the shadow.
"it is nobody i know," he said, examining it carefully, "but he does look a scoundrel."
"we were still discussing it, you remember," says mr. darling, "when nana came in with michael's medicine.
you will never carry the bottle in your mouth again, nana, and it is all my fault.
strong man though he was, there is no doubt that he had behaved rather foolishly over the medicine.
if he had a weakness, it was for thinking that all his life he had taken medicine boldly; and so now, when michael dodged the spoon in nana's mouth, he had said reprovingly, "be a man, michael."
"wo n't; wo n't," michael cried naughtily.
mrs. darling left the room to get a chocolate for him, and mr. darling thought this showed want of firmness.
"mother, do n't pamper him," he called after her.
"michael, when i was your age i took medicine without a murmur.
i said "thank you, kind parents, for giving me bottles to make me well.""
he really thought this was true, and wendy, who was now in her night-gown, believed it also, and she said, to encourage michael, "that medicine you sometimes take, father, is much nastier, is n't it?"
"ever so much nastier, "mr. darling said bravely, "and i would take it now as an example to you, michael, if i had n't lost the bottle."
he had not exactly lost it; he had climbed in the dead of night to the top of the wardrobe and hidden it there.
what he did not know was that the faithful liza had found it, and put it back on his wash-stand."
i know where it is, father," wendy cried, always glad to be of service.
"i'll bring it," and she was off before he could stop her.
immediately his spirits sank in the strangest way.
"john," he said, shuddering, "it's most beastly stuff.
it's that nasty, sticky, sweet kind."
"it will soon be over, father," john said cheerily, and then in rushed wendy with the medicine in a glass."
i have been as quick as i could," she panted.
"you have been wonderfully quick," her father retorted, with a vindictive politeness that was quite thrown away upon her.
"michael first," he said doggedly.
"father first," said michael, who was of a suspicious nature."
i shall be sick, you know," mr. darling said threateningly.
"come on, father," said john.
"hold your tongue, john," his father rapped out.
wendy was quite puzzled."
i thought you took it quite easily, father."
"that is not the point," he retorted.
"the point is, that there is more in my glass than in michael's spoon."
his proud heart was nearly bursting.
"and it is n't fair; i would say it though it were with my last breath; it is n't fair."
"father, i am waiting," said michael coldly.
"it's all very well to say you are waiting; so am i waiting."
"father's a cowardy custard."
"so are you a cowardy custard."
"i'm not frightened."
"neither am i frightened."
"well, then, take it."
"well, then, you take it."
wendy had a splendid idea.
"why not both take it at the same time?"
"certainly," said mr. darling.
"are you ready, michael?"
wendy gave the words, one, two, three, and michael took his medicine, but mr. darling slipped his behind his back.
there was a yell of rage from michael, and" o father!"
wendy exclaimed.
"what do you mean by "o father"?"
mr. darling demanded.
"stop that row, michael.
i meant to take mine, but i -- i missed it."
it was dreadful the way all the three were looking at him, just as if they did not admire him.
"look here, all of you," he said entreatingly, as soon as nana had gone into the bathroom," i have just thought of a splendid joke.
i shall pour my medicine into nana's bowl, and she will drink it, thinking it is milk!"
it was the colour of milk; but the children did not have their father's sense of humour, and they looked at him reproachfully as he poured the medicine into nana's bowl.
"what fun," he said doubtfully, and they did not dare expose him when mrs. darling and nana returned.
"nana, good dog," he said, patting her," i have put a little milk into your bowl, nana."
nana wagged her tail, ran to the medicine, and began lapping it.
then she gave mr. darling such a look, not an angry look: she showed him the great red tear that makes us so sorry for noble dogs, and crept into her kennel.
mr. darling was frightfully ashamed of himself, but he would not give in.
in a horrid silence mrs. darling smelt the bowl."
o george," she said, "it's your medicine!"
"it was only a joke," he roared, while she comforted her boys, and wendy hugged nana.
"much good," he said bitterly, "my wearing myself to the bone trying to be funny in this house."
and still wendy hugged nana.
"that's right," he shouted.
"coddle her!
nobody coddles me.
oh dear no!
i am only the breadwinner, why should i be coddled, why, why, why!"
"george," mrs. darling entreated him, "not so loud; the servants will hear you."
somehow they had got into the way of calling liza the servants.
"let them," he answered recklessly.
"bring in the whole world.
but i refuse to allow that dog to lord it in my nursery for an hour longer."
the children wept, and nana ran to him beseechingly, but he waved her back.
he felt he was a strong man again.
"in vain, in vain," he cried; "the proper place for you is the yard, and there you go to be tied up this instant."
"george, george," mrs. darling whispered, "remember what i told you about that boy."
alas, he would not listen.
he was determined to show who was master in that house, and when commands would not draw nana from the kennel, he lured her out of it with honeyed words, and seizing her roughly, dragged her from the nursery.
he was ashamed of himself, and yet he did it.
it was all owing to his too affectionate nature, which craved for admiration.
when he had tied her up in the back-yard, the wretched father went and sat in the passage, with his knuckles to his eyes.
in the meantime mrs. darling had put the children to bed in unwonted silence and lit their night-lights.
they could hear nana barking, and john whimpered, "it is because he is chaining her up in the yard," but wendy was wiser.
"that is not nana's unhappy bark," she said, little guessing what was about to happen; "that is her bark when she smells danger."
danger!
"are you sure, wendy?"
"oh yes."
mrs. darling quivered and went to the window.
it was securely fastened.
she looked out, and the night was peppered with stars.
they were crowding round the house, as if curious to see what was to take place there, but she did not notice this, nor that one or two of the smaller ones winked at her.
yet a nameless fear clutched at her heart and made her cry, "oh, how i wish that i was n't going to a party to-night!"
even michael, already half asleep, knew that she was perturbed, and he asked, "can anything harm us, mother, after the night-lights are lit?"
"nothing, precious," she said; "they are the eyes a mother leaves behind her to guard her children."
she went from bed to bed singing enchantments over them, and little michael flung his arms round her.
"mother," he cried, "i'm glad of you."
they were the last words she was to hear from him for a long time.
-lsb- illustration: peter flew in -rsb- no. 27 was only a few yards distant, but there had been a slight fall of snow, and father and mother darling picked their way over it deftly not to soil their shoes.
they were already the only persons in the street, and all the stars were watching them.
stars are beautiful, but they may not take an active part in anything, they must just look on for ever.
it is a punishment put on them for something they did so long ago that no star now knows what it was.
so the older ones have become glassy-eyed and seldom speak -lrb- winking is the star language -rrb-, but the little ones still wonder.
they are not really friendly to peter, who has a mischievous way of stealing up behind them and trying to blow them out; but they are so fond of fun that they were on his side to-night, and anxious to get the grown-ups out of the way.
so as soon as the door of 27 closed on mr. and mrs. darling there was a commotion in the firmament, and the smallest of all the stars in the milky way screamed out: "now, peter!"
chapter iii come away, come away!
for a moment after mr. and mrs. darling left the house the night-lights by the beds of the three children continued to burn clearly.
they were awfully nice little night-lights, and one can not help wishing that they could have kept awake to see peter; but wendy's light blinked and gave such a yawn that the other two yawned also, and before they could close their mouths all the three went out.
there was another light in the room now, a thousand times brighter than the night-lights, and in the time we have taken to say this, it has been in all the drawers in the nursery, looking for peter's shadow, rummaged the wardrobe and turned every pocket inside out.
it was not really a light; it made this light by flashing about so quickly, but when it came to rest for a second you saw it was a fairy, no longer than your hand, but still growing.
it was a girl called tinker bell exquisitely gowned in a skeleton leaf, cut low and square, through which her figure could be seen to the best advantage.
she was slightly inclined to embonpoint.
a moment after the fairy's entrance the window was blown open by the breathing of the little stars, and peter dropped in.
he had carried tinker bell part of the way, and his hand was still messy with the fairy dust.
"tinker bell," he called softly, after making sure that the children were asleep, "tink, where are you?"
she was in a jug for the moment, and liking it extremely; she had never been in a jug before.
"oh, do come out of that jug, and tell me, do you know where they put my shadow?"
the loveliest tinkle as of golden bells answered him.
it is the fairy language.
you ordinary children can never hear it, but if you were to hear it you would know that you had heard it once before.
tink said that the shadow was in the big box.
she meant the chest of drawers, and peter jumped at the drawers, scattering their contents to the floor with both hands, as kings toss ha "pence to the crowd.
in a moment he had recovered his shadow, and in his delight he forgot that he had shut tinker bell up in the drawer.
if he thought at all, but i do n't believe he ever thought, it was that he and his shadow, when brought near each other, would join like drops of water; and when they did not he was appalled.
he tried to stick it on with soap from the bathroom, but that also failed.
a shudder passed through peter, and he sat on the floor and cried.
his sobs woke wendy, and she sat up in bed.
she was not alarmed to see a stranger crying on the nursery floor; she was only pleasantly interested.
"boy," she said courteously, "why are you crying?"
peter could be exceedingly polite also, having learned the grand manner at fairy ceremonies, and he rose and bowed to her beautifully.
she was much pleased, and bowed beautifully to him from the bed.
"what's your name?"
he asked.
"wendy moira angela darling," she replied with some satisfaction.
"what is your name?"
"peter pan."
she was already sure that he must be peter, but it did seem a comparatively short name.
"is that all?"
"yes," he said rather sharply.
he felt for the first time that it was a shortish name.
"i'm so sorry," said wendy moira angela.
"it does n't matter," peter gulped.
she asked where he lived.
"second to the right," said peter, "and then straight on till morning."
"what a funny address!"
peter had a sinking.
for the first time he felt that perhaps it was a funny address.
"no, it is n't," he said."
i mean," wendy said nicely, remembering that she was hostess, "is that what they put on the letters?"
he wished she had not mentioned letters.
"do n't get any letters," he said contemptuously.
"but your mother gets letters?"
"do n't have a mother," he said.
not only had he no mother, but he had not the slightest desire to have one.
he thought them very overrated persons.
wendy, however, felt at once that she was in the presence of a tragedy."
o peter, no wonder you were crying," she said, and got out of bed and ran to him."
i was n't crying about mothers," he said rather indignantly."
i was crying because i ca n't get my shadow to stick on.
besides, i was n't crying."
"it has come off?"
"yes."
then wendy saw the shadow on the floor, looking so draggled, and she was frightfully sorry for peter.
"how awful!"
she said, but she could not help smiling when she saw that he had been trying to stick it on with soap.
how exactly like a boy!
fortunately she knew at once what to do "it must be sewn on," she said, just a little patronisingly.
"what's sewn?"
he asked.
"you're dreadfully ignorant."
"no, i'm not."
but she was exulting in his ignorance."
i shall sew it on for you, my little man," she said, though he was as tall as herself; and she got out her housewife, and sewed the shadow on to peter's foot."
i daresay it will hurt a little," she warned him.
"oh, i sha n't cry," said peter, who was already of opinion that he had never cried in his life.
and he clenched his teeth and did not cry; and soon his shadow was behaving properly, though still a little creased.
"perhaps i should have ironed it," wendy said thoughtfully; but peter, boylike, was indifferent to appearances, and he was now jumping about in the wildest glee.
alas, he had already forgotten that he owed his bliss to wendy.
he thought he had attached the shadow himself.
"how clever i am," he crowed rapturously, "oh, the cleverness of me!"
it is humiliating to have to confess that this conceit of peter was one of his most fascinating qualities.
to put it with brutal frankness, there never was a cockier boy.
but for the moment wendy was shocked.
"you conceit," she exclaimed, with frightful sarcasm; "of course i did nothing!"
"you did a little," peter said carelessly, and continued to dance."
a little!"
she replied with hauteur; "if i am no use i can at least withdraw"; and she sprang in the most dignified way into bed and covered her face with the blankets.
to induce her to look up he pretended to be going away, and when this failed he sat on the end of the bed and tapped her gently with his foot.
"wendy," he said, "do n't withdraw.
i ca n't help crowing, wendy, when i'm pleased with myself."
still she would not look up, though she was listening eagerly.
"wendy," he continued, in a voice that no woman has ever yet been able to resist, "wendy, one girl is more use than twenty boys."
now wendy was every inch a woman, though there were not very many inches, and she peeped out of the bedclothes.
"do you really think so, peter?"
"yes, i do.'"
i think it's perfectly sweet of you," she declared, "and i'll get up again"; and she sat with him on the side of the bed.
she also said she would give him a kiss if he liked, but peter did not know what she meant, and he held out his hand expectantly.
"surely you know what a kiss is?"
she asked, aghast."
i shall know when you give it to me," he replied stiffly; and not to hurt his feelings she gave him a thimble.
"now," said he, "shall i give you a kiss?"
and she replied with a slight primness, "if you please."
she made herself rather cheap by inclining her face toward him, but he merely dropped an acorn button into her hand; so she slowly returned her face to where it had been before, and said nicely that she would wear his kiss on the chain round her neck.
it was lucky that she did put it on that chain, for it was afterwards to save her life.
when people in our set are introduced, it is customary for them to ask each other's age, and so wendy, who always liked to do the correct thing, asked peter how old he was.
it was not really a happy question to ask him; it was like an examination paper that asks grammar, when what you want to be asked is kings of england."
i do n't know," he replied uneasily, "but i am quite young."
he really knew nothing about it; he had merely suspicions, but he said at a venture, "wendy, i ran away the day i was born."
wendy was quite surprised, but interested; and she indicated in the charming drawing-room manner, by a touch on her night-gown, that he could sit nearer her.
"it was because i heard father and mother," he explained in a low voice, "talking about what i was to be when i became a man."
he was extraordinarily agitated now."
i do n't want ever to be a man," he said with passion."
i want always to be a little boy and to have fun.
so i ran away to kensington gardens and lived a long long time among the fairies."
she gave him a look of the most intense admiration, and he thought it was because he had run away, but it was really because he knew fairies.
wendy had lived such a home life that to know fairies struck her as quite delightful.
she poured out questions about them, to his surprise, for they were rather a nuisance to him, getting in his way and so on, and indeed he sometimes had to give them a hiding.
still, he liked them on the whole, and he told her about the beginning of fairies.
"you see, wendy, when the first baby laughed for the first time, its laugh broke into a thousand pieces, and they all went skipping about, and that was the beginning of fairies."
tedious talk this, but being a stay-at-home she liked it.
"and so," he went on good-naturedly, "there ought to be one fairy for every boy and girl."
"ought to be?
is n't there?"
"no.
you see children know such a lot now, they soon do n't believe in fairies, and every time a child says," i do n't believe in fairies," there is a fairy somewhere that falls down dead.
really, he thought they had now talked enough about fairies, and it struck him that tinker bell was keeping very quiet."
i ca n't think where she has gone to," he said, rising, and he called tink by name.
wendy's heart went flutter with a sudden thrill.
"peter," she cried, clutching him, "you do n't mean to tell me that there is a fairy in this room!"
"she was here just now," he said a little impatiently.
"you do n't hear her, do you?"
and they both listened.
"the only sound i hear," said wendy, "is like a tinkle of bells."
"well, that's tink, that's the fairy language.
i think i hear her too."
the sound came from the chest of drawers, and peter made a merry face.
no one could ever look quite so merry as peter, and the loveliest of gurgles was his laugh.
he had his first laugh still.
"wendy," he whispered gleefully," i do believe i shut her up in the drawer!"
he let poor tink out of the drawer, and she flew about the nursery screaming with fury.
"you should n't say such things," peter retorted.
"of course i'm very sorry, but how could i know you were in the drawer?"
wendy was not listening to him."
o peter," she cried, "if she would only stand still and let me see her!"
"they hardly ever stand still," he said, but for one moment wendy saw the romantic figure come to rest on the cuckoo clock."
o the lovely!"
she cried, though tink's face was still distorted with passion.
"tink," said peter amiably, "this lady says she wishes you were her fairy."
tinker bell answered insolently.
"what does she say, peter?"
he had to translate.
"she is not very polite.
she says you are a great ugly girl, and that she is my fairy."
he tried to argue with tink.
"you know you ca n't be my fairy, tink, because i am a gentleman and you are a lady."
to this tink replied in these words, "you silly ass," and disappeared into the bathroom.
"she is quite a common fairy," peter explained apologetically; "she is called tinker bell because she mends the pots and kettles."
they were together in the armchair by this time, and wendy plied him with more questions.
"if you do n't live in kensington gardens now --" "sometimes i do still."
"but where do you live mostly now?"
"with the lost boys."
"who are they?"
"they are the children who fall out of their perambulators when the nurse is looking the other way.
if they are not claimed in seven days they are sent far away to the neverland to defray expenses.
i'm captain."
"what fun it must be!"
"yes," said cunning peter, "but we are rather lonely.
you see we have no female companionship."
"are none of the others girls?"
"oh no; girls, you know, are much too clever to fall out of their prams."
this flattered wendy immensely."
i think," she said, "it is perfectly lovely the way you talk about girls; john there just despises us."
for reply peter rose and kicked john out of bed, blankets and all; one kick.
this seemed to wendy rather forward for a first meeting, and she told him with spirit that he was not captain in her house.
however, john continued to sleep so placidly on the floor that she allowed him to remain there.
"and i know you meant to be kind," she said, relenting, "so you may give me a kiss."
for the moment she had forgotten his ignorance about kisses."
i thought you would want it back," he said a little bitterly, and offered to return her the thimble.
"oh dear," said the nice wendy," i do n't mean a kiss, i mean a thimble."
"what's that?"
"it's like this."
she kissed him.
"funny!"
said peter gravely.
"now shall i give you a thimble?"
"if you wish to," said wendy, keeping her head erect this time.
peter thimbled her, and almost immediately she screeched.
"what is it, wendy?"
"it was exactly as if some one were pulling my hair."
"that must have been tink.
i never knew her so naughty before."
and indeed tink was darting about again, using offensive language.
"she says she will do that to you, wendy, every time i give you a thimble."
"but why?"
"why, tink?"
again tink replied, "you silly ass."
peter could not understand why, but wendy understood; and she was just slightly disappointed when he admitted that he came to the nursery window not to see her but to listen to stories.
"you see i do n't know any stories.
none of the lost boys know any stories."
"how perfectly awful," wendy said.
"do you know," peter asked, "why swallows build in the eaves of houses?
it is to listen to the stories.
o wendy, your mother was telling you such a lovely story."
"which story was it?"
"about the prince who could n't find the lady who wore the glass slipper."
"peter," said wendy excitedly, "that was cinderella, and he found her, and they lived happy ever after."
peter was so glad that he rose from the floor, where they had been sitting, and hurried to the window.
"where are you going?"
she cried with misgiving.
"to tell the other boys."
"do n't go, peter," she entreated," i know such lots of stories."
those were her precise words, so there can be no denying that it was she who first tempted him.
he came back, and there was a greedy look in his eyes now which ought to have alarmed her, but did not.
"oh, the stories i could tell to the boys!"
she cried, and then peter gripped her and began to draw her toward the window.
"let me go!"
she ordered him.
"wendy, do come with me and tell the other boys."
of course she was very pleased to be asked, but she said, "oh dear, i ca n't.
think of mummy!
besides, i ca n't fly."
"i'll teach you."
"oh, how lovely to fly."
"i'll teach you how to jump on the wind's back, and then away we go."
"oo!"
she exclaimed rapturously.
"wendy, wendy, when you are sleeping in your silly bed you might be flying about with me saying funny things to the stars."
"oo!"
"and, wendy, there are mermaids."
"mermaids!
with tails?"
"such long tails."
"oh," cried wendy, "to see a mermaid!"
he had become frightfully cunning.
"wendy," he said, "how we should all respect you."
she was wriggling her body in distress.
it was quite as if she were trying to remain on the nursery floor.
but he had no pity for her.
"wendy," he said, the sly one, "you could tuck us in at night."
"oo!"
"none of us has ever been tucked in at night."
"oo," and her arms went out to him.
"and you could darn our clothes, and make pockets for us.
none of us has any pockets."
how could she resist.
"of course it's awfully fascinating!"
she cried.
"peter, would you teach john and michael to fly too?"
"if you like," he said indifferently; and she ran to john and michael and shook them.
"wake up," she cried, "peter pan has come and he is to teach us to fly."
john rubbed his eyes.
"then i shall get up," he said.
of course he was on the floor already.
"hallo," he said," i am up!"
michael was up by this time also, looking as sharp as a knife with six blades and a saw, but peter suddenly signed silence.
their faces assumed the awful craftiness of children listening for sounds from the grown-up world.
all was as still as salt.
then everything was right.
no, stop!
everything was wrong.
nana, who had been barking distressfully all the evening, was quiet now.
it was her silence they had heard.
"out with the light!
hide!
quick!"
cried john, taking command for the only time throughout the whole adventure.
and thus when liza entered, holding nana, the nursery seemed quite its old self, very dark; and you could have sworn you heard its three wicked inmates breathing angelically as they slept.
they were really doing it artfully from behind the window curtains.
liza was in a bad temper, for she was mixing the christmas puddings in the kitchen, and had been drawn away from them, with a raisin still on her cheek, by nana's absurd suspicions.
she thought the best way of getting a little quiet was to take nana to the nursery for a moment, but in custody of course.
"there, you suspicious brute," she said, not sorry that nana was in disgrace, "they are perfectly safe, are n't they?
every one of the little angels sound asleep in bed.
listen to their gentle breathing."
here michael, encouraged by his success, breathed so loudly that they were nearly detected.
nana knew that kind of breathing, and she tried to drag herself out of liza's clutches.
but liza was dense.
"no more of it, nana," she said sternly, pulling her out of the room."
i warn you if you bark again i shall go straight for master and missus and bring them home from the party, and then, oh, wo n't master whip you, just."
she tied the unhappy dog up again, but do you think nana ceased to bark?
bring master and missus home from the party!
why, that was just what she wanted.
do you think she cared whether she was whipped so long as her charges were safe?
unfortunately liza returned to her puddings, and nana, seeing that no help would come from her, strained and strained at the chain until at last she broke it.
in another moment she had burst into the dining-room of 27 and flung up her paws to heaven, her most expressive way of making a communication.
mr. and mrs. darling knew at once that something terrible was happening in their nursery, and without a good-bye to their hostess they rushed into the street.
but it was now ten minutes since three scoundrels had been breathing behind the curtains; and peter pan can do a great deal in ten minutes.
we now return to the nursery.
"it's all right," john announced, emerging from his hiding-place."
i say, peter, can you really fly?"
instead of troubling to answer him peter flew round the room, taking the mantelpiece on the way.
"how topping!"
said john and michael.
"how sweet!"
cried wendy.
"yes, i'm sweet, oh, i am sweet!"
said peter, forgetting his manners again.
it looked delightfully easy, and they tried it first from the floor and then from the beds, but they always went down instead of up."
i say, how do you do it?"
asked john, rubbing his knee.
he was quite a practical boy.
"you just think lovely wonderful thoughts," peter explained, "and they lift you up in the air."
he showed them again.
"you're so nippy at it," john said; "could n't you do it very slowly once?"
peter did it both slowly and quickly.
"i've got it now, wendy!"
cried john, but soon he found he had not.
not one of them could fly an inch, though even michael was in words of two syllables, and peter did not know a from z. of course peter had been trifling with them, for no one can fly unless the fairy dust has been blown on him.
fortunately, as we have mentioned, one of his hands was messy with it, and he blew some on each of them, with the most superb results.
"now just wriggle your shoulders this way," he said, "and let go."
they were all on their beds, and gallant michael let go first.
he did not quite mean to let go, but he did it, and immediately he was borne across the room."
i flewed!"
he screamed while still in mid-air.
john let go and met wendy near the bathroom.
"oh, lovely!"
"oh, ripping!"
"look at me!"
"look at me!"
"look at me!"
they were not nearly so elegant as peter, they could not help kicking a little, but their heads were bobbing against the ceiling, and there is almost nothing so delicious as that.
peter gave wendy a hand at first, but had to desist, tink was so indignant.
up and down they went, and round and round.
heavenly was wendy's word."
i say," cried john, "why should n't we all go out!"
of course it was to this that peter had been luring them.
michael was ready: he wanted to see how long it took him to do a billion miles.
but wendy hesitated.
"mermaids!"
said peter again.
"oo!"
"and there are pirates."
"pirates," cried john, seizing his sunday hat, "let us go at once."
it was just at this moment that mr. and mrs. darling hurried with nana out of 27.
they ran into the middle of the street to look up at the nursery window; and, yes, it was still shut, but the room was ablaze with light, and most heart-gripping sight of all, they could see in shadow on the curtain three little figures in night attire circling round and round, not on the floor but in the air.
not three figures, four!
in a tremble they opened the street door.
mr. darling would have rushed upstairs, but mrs. darling signed to him to go softly.
she even tried to make her heart go softly.
will they reach the nursery in time?
if so, how delightful for them, and we shall all breathe a sigh of relief, but there will be no story.
on the other hand, if they are not in time, i solemnly promise that it will all come right in the end.
they would have reached the nursery in time had it not been that the little stars were watching them.
once again the stars blew the window open, and that smallest star of all called out: "cave, peter!"
then peter knew that there was not a moment to lose.
"come," he cried imperiously, and soared out at once into the night, followed by john and michael and wendy.
mr. and mrs. darling and nana rushed into the nursery too late.
the birds were flown.
-lsb- illustration: the birds were flown -rsb- chapter iv the flight "second to the right, and straight on till morning."
that, peter had told wendy, was the way to the neverland; but even birds, carrying maps and consulting them at windy corners, could not have sighted it with these instructions.
peter, you see, just said anything that came into his head.
at first his companions trusted him implicitly, and so great were the delights of flying that they wasted time circling round church spires or any other tall objects on the way that took their fancy.
john and michael raced, michael getting a start.
they recalled with contempt that not so long ago they had thought themselves fine fellows for being able to fly round a room.
not so long ago.
but how long ago?
they were flying over the sea before this thought began to disturb wendy seriously.
john thought it was their second sea and their third night.
sometimes it was dark and sometimes light, and now they were very cold and again too warm.
did they really feel hungry at times, or were they merely pretending, because peter had such a jolly new way of feeding them?
his way was to pursue birds who had food in their mouths suitable for humans and snatch it from them; then the birds would follow and snatch it back; and they would all go chasing each other gaily for miles, parting at last with mutual expressions of good-will.
but wendy noticed with gentle concern that peter did not seem to know that this was rather an odd way of getting your bread and butter, nor even that there are other ways.
certainly they did not pretend to be sleepy, they were sleepy; and that was a danger, for the moment they popped off, down they fell.
the awful thing was that peter thought this funny.
"there he goes again!"
he would cry gleefully, as michael suddenly dropped like a stone.
"save him, save him!"
cried wendy, looking with horror at the cruel sea far below.
eventually peter would dive through the air, and catch michael just before he could strike the sea, and it was lovely the way he did it; but he always waited till the last moment, and you felt it was his cleverness that interested him and not the saving of human life.
also he was fond of variety, and the sport that engrossed him one moment would suddenly cease to engage him, so there was always the possibility that the next time you fell he would let you go.
he could sleep in the air without falling, by merely lying on his back and floating, but this was, partly at least, because he was so light that if you got behind him and blew he went faster.
"do be more polite to him," wendy whispered to john, when they were playing "follow my leader."
"then tell him to stop showing off," said john.
when playing follow my leader, peter would fly close to the water and touch each shark's tail in passing, just as in the street you may run your finger along an iron railing.
they could not follow him in this with much success, so perhaps it was rather like showing off, especially as he kept looking behind to see how many tails they missed.
"you must be nice to him," wendy impressed on her brothers.
"what could we do if he were to leave us?"
"we could go back," michael said.
"how could we ever find our way back without him?"
"well, then, we could go on," said john.
"that is the awful thing, john.
we should have to go on, for we do n't know how to stop."
this was true; peter had forgotten to show them how to stop.
john said that if the worst came to the worst, all they had to do was to go straight on, for the world was round, and so in time they must come back to their own window.
"and who is to get food for us, john?'"
i nipped a bit out of that eagle's mouth pretty neatly, wendy."
"after the twentieth try," wendy reminded him.
"and even though we became good at picking up food, see how we bump against clouds and things if he is not near to give us a hand."
indeed they were constantly bumping.
they could now fly strongly, though they still kicked far too much; but if they saw a cloud in front of them, the more they tried to avoid it, the more certainly did they bump into it.
if nana had been with them, she would have had a bandage round michael's forehead by this time.
peter was not with them for the moment, and they felt rather lonely up there by themselves.
he could go so much faster than they that he would suddenly shoot out of sight, to have some adventure in which they had no share.
he would come down laughing over something fearfully funny he had been saying to a star, but he had already forgotten what it was, or he would come up with mermaid scales still sticking to him, and yet not be able to say for certain what had been happening.
it was really rather irritating to children who had never seen a mermaid.
"and if he forgets them, so quickly," wendy argued, "how can we expect that he will go on remembering us?"
indeed, sometimes when he returned he did not remember them, at least not well.
wendy was sure of it.
she saw recognition come into his eyes as he was about to pass them the time of day and go on; once even she had to tell him her name.
"i'm wendy," she said agitatedly.
he was very sorry."
i say, wendy," he whispered to her, "always if you see me forgetting you, just keep on saying "i'm wendy," and then i'll remember."
of course this was rather unsatisfactory.
however, to make amends he showed them how to lie out flat on a strong wind that was going their way, and this was such a pleasant change that they tried it several times and found they could sleep thus with security.
indeed they would have slept longer, but peter tired quickly of sleeping, and soon he would cry in his captain voice, "we get off here."
so with occasional tiffs, but on the whole rollicking, they drew near the neverland; for after many moons they did reach it, and, what is more, they had been going pretty straight all the time, not perhaps so much owing to the guidance of peter or tink as because the island was out looking for them.
it is only thus that any one may sight those magic shores.
"there it is," said peter calmly.
"where, where?"
"where all the arrows are pointing."
indeed a million golden arrows were pointing out the island to the children, all directed by their friend the sun, who wanted them to be sure of their way before leaving them for the night.
-lsb- illustration: "let him keep who can" -rsb- wendy and john and michael stood on tiptoe in the air to get their first sight of the island.
strange to say, they all recognised it at once, and until fear fell upon them they hailed it, not as something long dreamt of and seen at last, but as a familiar friend to whom they were returning home for the holidays.
"john, there's the lagoon."
"wendy, look at the turtles burying their eggs in the sand.'"
i say, john, i see your flamingo with the broken leg."
"look, michael, there's your cave."
"john, what's that in the brushwood?"
"it's a wolf with her whelps.
wendy, i do believe that's your little whelp."
"there's my boat, john, with her sides stove in."
"no, it is n't.
why, we burned your boat."
"that's her, at any rate.
i say, john, i see the smoke of the redskin camp."
"where?
show me, and i'll tell you by the way the smoke curls whether they are on the war-path."
"there, just across the mysterious river.'"
i see now.
yes, they are on the war-path right enough."
peter was a little annoyed with them for knowing so much; but if he wanted to lord it over them his triumph was at hand, for have i not told you that anon fear fell upon them?
it came as the arrows went, leaving the island in gloom.
in the old days at home the neverland had always begun to look a little dark and threatening by bedtime.
then unexplored patches arose in it and spread; black shadows moved about in them; the roar of the beasts of prey was quite different now, and above all, you lost the certainty that you would win.
you were quite glad that the night-lights were in.
you even liked nana to say that this was just the mantelpiece over here, and that the neverland was all make-believe.
of course the neverland had been make-believe in those days; but it was real now, and there were no night-lights, and it was getting darker every moment, and where was nana?
they had been flying apart, but they huddled close to peter now.
his careless manner had gone at last, his eyes were sparkling, and a tingle went through them every time they touched his body.
they were now over the fearsome island, flying so low that sometimes a tree grazed their feet.
nothing horrid was visible in the air, yet their progress had become slow and laboured, exactly as if they were pushing their way through hostile forces.
sometimes they hung in the air until peter had beaten on it with his fists.
"they do n't want us to land," he explained.
"who are they?"
wendy whispered, shuddering.
but he could not or would not say.
tinker bell had been asleep on his shoulder, but now he wakened her and sent her on in front.
sometimes he poised himself in the air, listening intently with his hand to his ear, and again he would stare down with eyes so bright that they seemed to bore two holes to earth.
having done these things, he went on again.
his courage was almost appalling.
"do you want an adventure now," he said casually to john, "or would you like to have your tea first?"
wendy said "tea first" quickly, and michael pressed her hand in gratitude, but the braver john hesitated.
"what kind of adventure?"
he asked cautiously.
"there's a pirate asleep in the pampas just beneath us," peter told him.
"if you like, we'll go down and kill him.'"
i do n't see him," john said after a long pause."
i do."
"suppose," john said a little huskily, "he were to wake up."
peter spoke indignantly.
"you do n't think i would kill him while he was sleeping!
i would wake him first, and then kill him.
that's the way i always do.'"
i say!
do you kill many?"
"tons."
john said "how ripping," but decided to have tea first.
he asked if there were many pirates on the island just now, and peter said he had never known so many.
"who is captain now?"
"hook," answered peter; and his face became very stern as he said that hated word.
"jas.
hook?"
"ay."
then indeed michael began to cry, and even john could speak in gulps only, for they knew hook's reputation.
"he was blackbeard's bo "sun," john whispered huskily.
"he is the worst of them all.
he is the only man of whom barbecue was afraid."
"that's him," said peter.
"what is he like?
is he big?"
"he is not so big as he was."
"how do you mean?'"
i cut off a bit of him."
"you!"
"yes, me," said peter sharply."
i was n't meaning to be disrespectful."
"oh, all right" "but, i say, what bit?"
"his right hand."
"then he ca n't fight now?"
"oh, ca n't he just!"
"left-hander?"
"he has an iron hook instead of a right hand, and he claws with it."
"claws!'"
i say, john," said peter.
"yes."
"say, "ay, ay, sir.""
"ay, ay, sir."
"there is one thing," peter continued, "that every boy who serves under me has to promise, and so must you."
john paled.
"it is this, if we meet hook in open fight, you must leave him to me.'"
i promise," john said loyally.
for the moment they were feeling less eerie, because tink was flying with them, and in her light they could distinguish each other.
unfortunately she could not fly so slowly as they, and so she had to go round and round them in a circle in which they moved as in a halo.
wendy quite liked it, until peter pointed out the drawback.
"she tells me," he said, "that the pirates sighted us before the darkness came, and got long tom out."
"the big gun?"
"yes.
and of course they must see her light, and if they guess we are near it they are sure to let fly."
"wendy!"
"john!"
"michael!"
"tell her to go away at once, peter," the three cried simultaneously, but he refused.
"she thinks we have lost the way," he replied stiffly, "and she is rather frightened.
you do n't think i would send her away all by herself when she is frightened!"
for a moment the circle of light was broken, and something gave peter a loving little pinch.
"then tell her," wendy begged, "to put out her light."
"she ca n't put it out.
that is about the only thing fairies ca n't do.
it just goes out of itself when she falls asleep, same as the stars."
"then tell her to sleep at once," john almost ordered.
"she ca n't sleep except when she's sleepy.
it is the only other thing fairies ca n't do."
"seems to me," growled john, "these are the only two things worth doing."
here he got a pinch, but not a loving one.
"if only one of us had a pocket," peter said, "we could carry her in it."
however, they had set off in such a hurry that there was not a pocket between the four of them.
he had a happy idea.
john's hat!
tink agreed to travel by hat if it was carried in the hand.
john carried it, though she had hoped to be carried by peter.
presently wendy took the hat, because john said it struck against his knee as he flew; and this, as we shall see, led to mischief, for tinker bell hated to be under an obligation to wendy.
in the black topper the light was completely hidden, and they flew on in silence.
it was the stillest silence they had ever known, broken once by a distant lapping, which peter explained was the wild beasts drinking at the ford, and again by a rasping sound that might have been the branches of trees rubbing together, but he said it was the redskins sharpening their knives.
even these noises ceased.
to michael the loneliness was dreadful.
"if only something would make a sound!"
he cried.
as if in answer to his request, the air was rent by the most tremendous crash he had ever heard.
the pirates had fired long tom at them.
the roar of it echoed through the mountains, and the echoes seemed to cry savagely, "where are they, where are they, where are they?"
thus sharply did the terrified three learn the difference between an island of make-believe and the same island come true.
when at last the heavens were steady again, john and michael found themselves alone in the darkness.
john was treading the air mechanically, and michael without knowing how to float was floating.
"are you shot?"
john whispered tremulously."
i have n't tried yet," michael whispered back.
we know now that no one had been hit.
peter, however, had been carried by the wind of the shot far out to sea, while wendy was blown upwards with no companion but tinker bell.
it would have been well for wendy if at that moment she had dropped the hat.
i do n't know whether the idea came suddenly to tink, or whether she had planned it on the way, but she at once popped out of the hat and began to lure wendy to her destruction.
tink was not all bad: or, rather, she was all bad just now, but, on the other hand, sometimes she was all good.
fairies have to be one thing or the other, because being so small they unfortunately have room for one feeling only at a time.
they are, however, allowed to change, only it must be a complete change.
at present she was full of jealousy of wendy.
what she said in her lovely tinkle wendy could not of course understand, and i believe some of it was bad words, but it sounded kind, and she flew back and forward, plainly meaning "follow me, and all will be well."
what else could poor wendy do?
she called to peter and john and michael, and got only mocking echoes in reply.
she did not yet know that tink hated her with the fierce hatred of a very woman.
and so, bewildered, and now staggering in her flight, she followed tink to her doom.
chapter v the island come true feeling that peter was on his way back, the neverland had again woke into life.
we ought to use the pluperfect and say wakened, but woke is better and was always used by peter.
in his absence things are usually quiet on the island.
the fairies take an hour longer in the morning, the beasts attend to their young, the redskins feed heavily for six days and nights, and when pirates and lost boys meet they merely bite their thumbs at each other.
but with the coming of peter, who hates lethargy, they are all under way again: if you put your ear to the ground now, you would hear the whole island seething with life.
on this evening the chief forces of the island were disposed as follows.
the lost boys were out looking for peter, the pirates were out looking for the lost boys, the redskins were out looking for the pirates, and the beasts were out looking for the redskins.
they were going round and round the island, but they did not meet because all were going at the same rate.
all wanted blood except the boys, who liked it as a rule, but to-night were out to greet their captain.
the boys on the island vary, of course, in numbers, according as they get killed and so on; and when they seem to be growing up, which is against the rules, peter thins them out; but at this time there were six of them, counting the twins as two.
let us pretend to lie here among the sugar-cane and watch them as they steal by in single file, each with his hand on his dagger.
they are forbidden by peter to look in the least like him, and they wear the skins of bears slain by themselves, in which they are so round and furry that when they fall they roll.
they have therefore become very sure-footed.
the first to pass is tootles, not the least brave but the most unfortunate of all that gallant band.
he had been in fewer adventures than any of them, because the big things constantly happened just when he had stepped round the corner; all would be quiet, he would take the opportunity of going off to gather a few sticks for firewood, and then when he returned the others would be sweeping up the blood.
this ill-luck had given a gentle melancholy to his countenance, but instead of souring his nature had sweetened it, so that he was quite the humblest of the boys.
poor kind tootles, there is danger in the air for you to-night.
take care lest an adventure is now offered you, which, if accepted, will plunge you in deepest woe.
tootles, the fairy tink who is bent on mischief this night is looking for a tool, and she thinks you the most easily tricked of the boys.
"ware tinker bell.
would that he could hear us, but we are not really on the island, and he passes by, biting his knuckles.
next comes nibs, the gay and debonair, followed by slightly, who cuts whistles out of the trees and dances ecstatically to his own tunes.
slightly is the most conceited of the boys.
he thinks he remembers the days before he was lost, with their manners and customs, and this has given his nose an offensive tilt.
curly is fourth; he is a pickle, and so often has he had to deliver up his person when peter said sternly, "stand forth the one who did this thing," that now at the command he stands forth automatically whether he has done it or not.
last come the twins, who can not be described because we should be sure to be describing the wrong one.
peter never quite knew what twins were, and his band were not allowed to know anything he did not know, so these two were always vague about themselves, and did their best to give satisfaction by keeping close together in an apologetic sort of way.
the boys vanish in the gloom, and after a pause, but not a long pause, for things go briskly on the island, come the pirates on their track.
we hear them before they are seen, and it is always the same dreadful song: "avast belay, yo ho, heave to, a-pirating we go, and if we're parted by a shot we're sure to meet below!"
a more villainous-looking lot never hung in a row on execution dock.
here, a little in advance, ever and again with his head to the ground listening, his great arms bare, pieces of eight in his ears as ornaments, is the handsome italian cecco, who cut his name in letters of blood on the back of the governor of the prison at gao.
that gigantic black behind him has had many names since he dropped the one with which dusky mothers still terrify their children on the banks of the guadjo-mo.
here is bill jukes, every inch of him tattooed, the same bill jukes who got six dozen on the walrus from flint before he would drop the bag of moidores; and cookson, said to be black murphy's brother -lrb- but this was never proved -rrb-; and gentleman starkey, once an usher in a public school and still dainty in his ways of killing; and skylights -lrb- morgan's skylights -rrb-; and the irish bo "sun smee, an oddly genial man who stabbed, so to speak, without offence, and was the only nonconformist in hook's crew; and noodler, whose hands were fixed on backwards; and robt.
mullins and alf mason and many another ruffian long known and feared on the spanish main.
in the midst of them, the blackest and largest jewel in that dark setting, reclined james hook, or as he wrote himself, jas.
hook, of whom it is said he was the only man that the sea-cook feared.
he lay at his ease in a rough chariot drawn and propelled by his men, and instead of a right hand he had the iron hook with which ever and anon he encouraged them to increase their pace.
as dogs this terrible man treated and addressed them, and as dogs they obeyed him.
in person he was cadaverous and blackavized, and his hair was dressed in long curls, which at a little distance looked like black candles, and gave a singularly threatening expression to his handsome countenance.
his eyes were of the blue of the forget-me-not, and of a profound melancholy, save when he was plunging his hook into you, at which time two red spots appeared in them and lit them up horribly.
in manner, something of the grand seigneur still clung to him, so that he even ripped you up with an air, and i have been told that he was a raconteur of repute.
he was never more sinister than when he was most polite, which is probably the truest test of breeding; and the elegance of his diction, even when he was swearing, no less than the distinction of his demeanour, showed him one of a different caste from his crew.
a man of indomitable courage, it was said of him that the only thing he shied at was the sight of his own blood, which was thick and of an unusual colour.
in dress he somewhat aped the attire associated with the name of charles ii., having heard it said in some earlier period of his career that he bore a strange resemblance to the ill-fated stuarts; and in his mouth he had a holder of his own contrivance which enabled him to smoke two cigars at once.
but undoubtedly the grimmest part of him was his iron claw.
let us now kill a pirate, to show hook's method.
skylights will do.
as they pass, skylights lurches clumsily against him, ruffling his lace collar; the hook shoots forth, there is a tearing sound and one screech, then the body is kicked aside, and the pirates pass on.
he has not even taken the cigars from his mouth.
such is the terrible man against whom peter pan is pitted.
which will win?
on the trail of the pirates, stealing noiselessly down the war-path, which is not visible to inexperienced eyes, come the redskins, every one of them with his eyes peeled.
they carry tomahawks and knives, and their naked bodies gleam with paint and oil.
strung around them are scalps, of boys as well as of pirates, for these are the piccaninny tribe, and not to be confused with the softer-hearted delawares or the hurons.
in the van, on all fours, is great big little panther, a brave of so many scalps that in his present position they somewhat impede his progress.
bringing up the rear, the place of greatest danger, comes tiger lily, proudly erect, a princess in her own right.
she is the most beautiful of dusky dianas and the belle of the piccaninnies, coquettish, cold and amorous by turns; there is not a brave who would not have the wayward thing to wife, but she staves off the altar with a hatchet.
observe how they pass over fallen twigs without making the slightest noise.
the only sound to be heard is their somewhat heavy breathing.
the fact is that they are all a little fat just now after the heavy gorging, but in time they will work this off.
for the moment, however, it constitutes their chief danger.
the redskins disappear as they have come like shadows, and soon their place is taken by the beasts, a great and motley procession: lions, tigers, bears, and the innumerable smaller savage things that flee from them, for every kind of beast, and, more particularly; all the man-eaters, live cheek by jowl on the favoured island.
their tongues are hanging out, they are hungry to-night.
when they have passed, comes the last figure of all, a gigantic crocodile.
we shall see for whom she is looking presently.
the crocodile passes, but soon the boys appear again, for the procession must continue indefinitely until one of the parties stops or changes its pace.
then quickly they will be on top of each other.
all are keeping a sharp look-out in front, but none suspects that the danger may be creeping up from behind.
this shows how real the island was.
the first to fall out of the moving circle was the boys.
they flung themselves down on the sward, close to their underground home."
i do wish peter would come back," every one of them said nervously, though in height and still more in breadth they were all larger than their captain."
i am the only one who is not afraid of the pirates," slightly said, in the tone that prevented his being a general favourite; but perhaps some distant sound disturbed him, for he added hastily, "but i wish he would come back, and tell us whether he has heard anything more about cinderella."
they talked of cinderella, and tootles was confident that his mother must have been very like her.
it was only in peter's absence that they could speak of mothers, the subject being forbidden by him as silly.
"all i remember about my mother," nibs told them, "is that she often said to father, "oh, how i wish i had a cheque-book of my own."
i do n't know what a cheque-book is, but i should just love to give my mother one."
while they talked they heard a distant sound.
you or i, not being wild things of the woods, would have heard nothing, but they heard it, and it was the grim song: "yo ho, yo ho, the pirate life, the flag o" skull and bones, a merry hour, a hempen rope, and hey for davy jones."
at once the lost boys -- but where are they?
they are no longer there.
rabbits could not have disappeared more quickly.
i will tell you where they are.
with the exception of nibs, who has darted away to reconnoitre, they are already in their home under the ground, a very delightful residence of which we shall see a good deal presently.
but how have they reached it?
for there is no entrance to be seen, not so much as a pile of brushwood, which if removed would disclose the mouth of a cave.
look closely, however, and you may note that there are here seven large trees, each having in its hollow trunk a hole as large as a boy.
these are the seven entrances to the home under the ground, for which hook has been searching in vain these many moons.
will he find it to-night?
as the pirates advanced, the quick eye of starkey sighted nibs disappearing through the wood, and at once his pistol flashed out.
but an iron claw gripped his shoulder.
"captain, let go," he cried, writhing.
now for the first time we hear the voice of hook.
it was a black voice.
"put back that pistol first," it said threateningly.
"it was one of those boys you hate.
i could have shot him dead."
"ay, and the sound would have brought tiger lily's redskins upon us.
do you want to lose your scalp?"
"shall i after him, captain," asked pathetic smee, "and tickle him with johnny corkscrew?"
smee had pleasant names for everything, and his cutlass was johnny corkscrew, because he wriggled it in the wound.
one could mention many lovable traits in smee.
for instance, after killing, it was his spectacles he wiped instead of his weapon.
"johnny's a silent fellow," he reminded hook.
"not now, smee," hook said darkly.
"he is only one, and i want to mischief all the seven.
scatter and look for them."
the pirates disappeared among the trees, and in a moment their captain and smee were alone.
hook heaved a heavy sigh; and i know not why it was, perhaps it was because of the soft beauty of the evening, but there came over him a desire to confide to his faithful bo "sun the story of his life.
he spoke long and earnestly, but what it was all about smee, who was rather stupid, did not know in the least.
anon he caught the word peter.
"most of all," hook was saying passionately," i want their captain, peter pan.
't was he cut off my arm."
he brandished the hook threateningly.
"i've waited long to shake his hand with this.
oh, i'll tear him."
"and yet," said smee," i have often heard you say that hook was worth a score of hands, for combing the hair and other homely uses."
"ay," the captain answered, "if i was a mother i would pray to have my children born with this instead of that," and he cast a look of pride upon his iron hand and one of scorn upon the other.
then again he frowned.
"peter flung my arm," he said, wincing, "to a crocodile that happened to be passing by.'"
i have often," said smee, "noticed your strange dread of crocodiles."
"not of crocodiles," hook corrected him, "but of that one crocodile."
he lowered his voice.
"it liked my arm so much, smee, that it has followed me ever since, from sea to sea and from land to land, licking its lips for the rest of me."
"in a way," said smee, "it's a sort of compliment.'"
i want no such compliments," hook barked petulantly."
i want peter pan, who first gave the brute its taste for me."
he sat down on a large mushroom, and now there was a quiver in his voice.
"smee," he said huskily, "that crocodile would have had me before this, but by a lucky chance it swallowed a clock which goes tick tick inside it, and so before it can reach me i hear the tick and bolt."
he laughed, but in a hollow way.
"some day," said smee, "the clock will run down, and then he'll get you."
hook wetted his dry lips.
"ay," he said, "that's the fear that haunts me."
since sitting down he had felt curiously warm.
"smee," he said, "this seat is hot."
he jumped up.
"odds bobs, hammer and tongs i'm burning."
they examined the mushroom, which was of a size and solidity unknown on the mainland; they tried to pull it up, and it came away at once in their hands, for it had no root.
stranger still, smoke began at once to ascend.
the pirates looked at each other."
a chimney!"
they both exclaimed.
they had indeed discovered the chimney of the home under the ground.
it was the custom of the boys to stop it with a mushroom when enemies were in the neighbourhood.
not only smoke came out of it.
there came also children's voices, for so safe did the boys feel in their hiding-place that they were gaily chattering.
the pirates listened grimly, and then replaced the mushroom.
they looked around them and noted the holes in the seven trees.
"did you hear them say peter pan's from home?"
smee whispered, fidgeting with johnny corkscrew.
hook nodded.
he stood for a long time lost in thought, and at last a curdling smile lit up his swarthy face.
smee had been waiting for it.
"unrip your plan, captain," he cried eagerly.
"to return to the ship," hook replied slowly through his teeth, "and cook a large rich cake of a jolly thickness with green sugar on it.
there can be but one room below, for there is but one chimney.
the silly moles had not the sense to see that they did not need a door apiece.
that shows they have no mother.
we will leave the cake on the shore of the mermaids" lagoon.
these boys are always swimming about there, playing with the mermaids.
they will find the cake and they will gobble it up, because, having no mother, they do n't know how dangerous't is to eat rich damp cake."
he burst into laughter, not hollow laughter now, but honest laughter.
"aha, they will die."
smee had listened with growing admiration.
"it's the wickedest, prettiest policy ever i heard of," he cried, and in their exultation they danced and sang: "avast, belay, when i appear, by fear they're overtook; nought's left upon your bones when you have shaken claws with cook."
they began the verse, but they never finished it, for another sound broke in and stilled them.
it was at first such a tiny sound that a leaf might have fallen on it and smothered it, but as it came nearer it was more distinct.
tick tick tick tick.
hook stood shuddering, one foot in the air.
"the crocodile," he gasped, and bounded away, followed by his bo "sun.
it was indeed the crocodile.
it had passed the redskins, who were now on the trail of the other pirates.
it oozed on after hook.
once more the boys emerged into the open; but the dangers of the night were not yet over, for presently nibs rushed breathless into their midst, pursued by a pack of wolves.
the tongues of the pursuers were hanging out; the baying of them was horrible.
"save me, save me!"
cried nibs, falling on the ground.
"but what can we do, what can we do?"
it was a high compliment to peter that at that dire moment their thoughts turned to him.
"what would peter do?"
they cried simultaneously.
almost in the same breath they added, "peter would look at them through his legs."
and then, "let us do what peter would do."
it is quite the most successful way of defying wolves, and as one boy they bent and looked through their legs.
the next moment is the long one; but victory came quickly, for as the boys advanced upon them in this terrible attitude, the wolves dropped their tails and fled.
now nibs rose from the ground, and the others thought that his staring eyes still saw the wolves.
but it was not wolves he saw."
i have seen a wonderfuller thing," he cried, as they gathered round him eagerly."
a great white bird.
it is flying this way."
"what kind of a bird, do you think?'"
i do n't know," nibs said, awestruck, "but it looks so weary, and as it flies it moans, "poor wendy.""
"poor wendy?'"
i remember," said slightly instantly, "there are birds called wendies."
"see, it comes," cried curly, pointing to wendy in the heavens.
wendy was now almost overhead, and they could hear her plaintive cry.
but more distinct came the shrill voice of tinker bell.
the jealous fairy had now cast off all disguise of friendship, and was darting at her victim from every direction, pinching savagely each time she touched.
"hullo, tink," cried the wondering boys.
tink's reply rang out: "peter wants you to shoot the wendy."
it was not in their nature to question when peter ordered.
"let us do what peter wishes," cried the simple boys.
"quick, bows and arrows."
all but tootles popped down their trees.
he had a bow and arrow with him, and tink noted it, and rubbed her little hands.
"quick, tootles, quick," she screamed.
"peter will be so pleased."
tootles excitedly fitted the arrow to his bow.
"out of the way, tink," he shouted; and then he fired, and wendy fluttered to the ground with an arrow in her breast.
chapter vi the little house foolish tootles was standing like a conqueror over wendy's body when the other boys sprang, armed, from their trees.
"you are too late," he cried proudly," i have shot the wendy.
peter will be so pleased with me."
overhead tinker bell shouted "silly ass!"
and darted into hiding.
the others did not hear her.
they had crowded round wendy, and as they looked a terrible silence fell upon the wood.
if wendy's heart had been beating they would all have heard it.
slightly was the first to speak.
"this is no bird," he said in a scared voice."
i think it must be a lady.'"
a lady?"
said tootles, and fell a-trembling.
"and we have killed her," nibs said hoarsely.
they all whipped off their caps.
"now i see," curly said; "peter was bringing her to us."
he threw himself sorrowfully on the ground."
a lady to take care of us at last," said one of the twins, "and you have killed her."
they were sorry for him, but sorrier for themselves, and when he took a step nearer them they turned from him.
tootles" face was very white, but there was a dignity about him now that had never been there before."
i did it," he said, reflecting.
"when ladies used to come to me in dreams, i said, "pretty mother, pretty mother."
but when at last she really came, i shot her."
he moved slowly away.
"do n't go," they called in pity."
i must," he answered, shaking;" i am so afraid of peter."
it was at this tragic moment that they heard a sound which made the heart of every one of them rise to his mouth.
they heard peter crow.
"peter!"
they cried, for it was always thus that he signalled his return.
"hide her," they whispered, and gathered hastily around wendy.
but tootles stood aloof.
again came that ringing crow, and peter dropped in front of them.
"greeting, boys," he cried, and mechanically they saluted, and then again was silence.
he frowned."
i am back," he said hotly, "why do you not cheer?"
they opened their mouths, but the cheers would not come.
he overlooked it in his haste to tell the glorious tidings.
"great news, boys," he cried," i have brought at last a mother for you all."
still no sound, except a little thud from tootles as he dropped on his knees.
"have you not seen her?"
asked peter, becoming troubled.
"she flew this way."
"ah me," one voice said, and another said, "oh, mournful day."
tootles rose.
"peter," he said quietly," i will show her to you"; and when the others would still have hidden her he said, "back, twins, let peter see."
so they all stood back, and let him see, and after he had looked for a little time he did not know what to do next.
"she is dead," he said uncomfortably.
"perhaps she is frightened at being dead."
he thought of hopping off in a comic sort of way till he was out of sight of her, and then never going near the spot any more.
they would all have been glad to follow if he had done this.
but there was the arrow.
he took it from her heart and faced his band.
"whose arrow?"
he demanded sternly.
"mine, peter," said tootles on his knees.
"oh, dastard hand," peter said, and he raised the arrow to use it as a dagger.
tootles did not flinch.
he bared his breast.
"strike, peter," he said firmly, "strike true."
twice did peter raise the arrow, and twice did his hand fall."
i can not strike," he said with awe, "there is something stays my hand."
all looked at him in wonder, save nibs, who fortunately looked at wendy.
"it is she," he cried, "the wendy lady; see, her arm."
wonderful to relate, wendy had raised her arm.
nibs bent over her and listened reverently."
i think she said "poor tootles,"" he whispered.
"she lives," peter said briefly.
slightly cried instantly, "the wendy lady lives."
then peter knelt beside her and found his button.
you remember she had put it on a chain that she wore round her neck.
"see," he said, "the arrow struck against this.
it is the kiss i gave her.
it has saved her life.'"
i remember kisses," slightly interposed quickly, "let me see it.
ay, that's a kiss."
peter did not hear him.
he was begging wendy to get better quickly, so that he could show her the mermaids.
of course she could not answer yet, being still in a frightful faint; but from overhead came a wailing note.
"listen to tink," said curly, "she is crying because the wendy lives."
then they had to tell peter of tink's crime, and almost never had they seen him look so stern.
"listen, tinker bell," he cried;" i am your friend no more.
begone from me for ever."
she flew on to his shoulder and pleaded, but he brushed her off.
not until wendy again raised her arm did he relent sufficiently to say, "well, not for ever, but for a whole week."
do you think tinker bell was grateful to wendy for raising her arm?
oh dear no, never wanted to pinch her so much.
fairies indeed are strange, and peter, who understood them best, often cuffed them.
but what to do with wendy in her present delicate state of health?
"let us carry her down into the house," curly suggested.
"ay," said slightly, "that is what one does with ladies."
"no, no," peter said, "you must not touch her.
it would not be sufficiently respectful."
"that," said slightly, "is what i was thinking."
"but if she lies there," tootles said, "she will die."
"ay, she will die," slightly admitted, "but there is no way out."
"yes, there is," cried peter.
"let us build a little house round her."
they were all delighted.
"quick," he ordered them, "bring me each of you the best of what we have.
gut our house.
be sharp."
in a moment they were as busy as tailors the night before a wedding.
they skurried this way and that, down for bedding, up for firewood, and while they were at it, who should appear but john and michael.
as they dragged along the ground they fell asleep standing, stopped, woke up, moved another step and slept again.
"john, john," michael would cry, "wake up.
where is nana, john, and mother?"
and then john would rub his eyes and mutter, "it is true, we did fly."
you may be sure they were very relieved to find peter.
"hullo, peter," they said.
"hullo," replied peter amicably, though he had quite forgotten them.
he was very busy at the moment measuring wendy with his feet to see how large a house she would need.
of course he meant to leave room for chairs and a table.
john and michael watched him.
"is wendy asleep?"
they asked.
"yes."
"john," michael proposed, "let us wake her and get her to make supper for us"; but as he said it some of the other boys rushed on carrying branches for the building of the house.
"look at them!"
he cried.
"curly," said peter in his most captainy voice, "see that these boys help in the building of the house."
"ay, ay, sir."
"build a house?"
exclaimed john.
"for the wendy," said curly.
"for wendy?"
john said, aghast.
"why, she is only a girl."
"that," explained curly, "is why we are her servants."
"you?
wendy's servants!"
"yes," said peter, "and you also.
away with them."
the astounded brothers were dragged away to hack and hew and carry.
"chairs and a fender first," peter ordered.
"then we shall build the house round them."
"ay," said slightly, "that is how a house is built; it all comes back to me."
peter thought of everything.
"slightly," he ordered, "fetch a doctor."
"ay, ay," said slightly at once, and disappeared, scratching his head.
but he knew peter must be obeyed, and he returned in a moment, wearing john's hat and looking solemn.
"please, sir," said peter, going to him, "are you a doctor?"
the difference between him and the other boys at such a time was that they knew it was make-believe, while to him make-believe and true were exactly the same thing.
this sometimes troubled them, as when they had to make-believe that they had had their dinners.
if they broke down in their make-believe he rapped them on the knuckles.
"yes, my little man," anxiously replied slightly, who had chapped knuckles.
"please, sir," peter explained," a lady lies very ill."
she was lying at their feet, but slightly had the sense not to see her.
"tut, tut, tut," he said, "where does she lie?"
"in yonder glade.'"
i will put a glass thing in her mouth," said slightly; and he made-believe to do it, while peter waited.
it was an anxious moment when the glass thing was withdrawn.
"how is she?"
inquired peter.
"tut, tut, tut," said slightly, "this has cured her.'"
i am glad," peter cried."
i will call again in the evening," slightly said; "give her beef tea out of a cup with a spout to it"; but after he had returned the hat to john he blew big breaths, which was his habit on escaping from a difficulty.
in the meantime the wood had been alive with the sound of axes; almost everything needed for a cosy dwelling already lay at wendy's feet.
"if only we knew," said one, "the kind of house she likes best."
"peter," shouted another, "she is moving in her sleep."
"her mouth opens," cried a third, looking respectfully into it.
"oh, lovely!"
"perhaps she is going to sing in her sleep," said peter.
"wendy, sing the kind of house you would like to have."
immediately, without opening her eyes, wendy began to sing: "i wish i had a pretty house, the littlest ever seen, with funny little red walls and roof of mossy green."
they gurgled with joy at this, for by the greatest good luck the branches they had brought were sticky with red sap, and all the ground was carpeted with moss.
as they rattled up the little house they broke into song themselves: "we've built the little walls and roof and made a lovely door, so tell us, mother wendy, what are you wanting more?"
to this she answered rather greedily: "oh, really next i think i'll have gay windows all about, with roses peeping in, you know, and babies peeping out."
with a blow of their fists they made windows, and large yellow leaves were the blinds.
but roses --?
"roses," cried peter sternly.
quickly they made-believe to grow the loveliest roses up the walls.
babies?
to prevent peter ordering babies they hurried into song again: "we've made the roses peeping out, the babes are at the door, we can not make ourselves, you know, "cos we've been made before."
peter, seeing this to be a good idea, at once pretended that it was his own.
the house was quite beautiful, and no doubt wendy was very cosy within, though, of course, they could no longer see her.
peter strode up and down, ordering finishing touches.
nothing escaped his eagle eye.
just when it seemed absolutely finished, "there's no knocker on the door," he said.
they were very ashamed, but tootles gave the sole of his shoe, and it made an excellent knocker.
absolutely finished now, they thought.
not a bit of it.
"there's no chimney," peter said; "we must have a chimney."
"it certainly does need a chimney," said john importantly.
this gave peter an idea.
he snatched the hat off john's head, knocked out the bottom, and put the hat on the roof.
the little house was so pleased to have such a capital chimney that, as if to say thank you, smoke immediately began to come out of the hat.
now really and truly it was finished.
nothing remained to do but to knock.
"all look your best," peter warned them; "first impressions are awfully important."
he was glad no one asked him what first impressions are; they were all too busy looking their best.
he knocked politely; and now the wood was as still as the children, not a sound to be heard except from tinker bell, who was watching from a branch and openly sneering.
what the boys were wondering was, would any one answer the knock?
if a lady, what would she be like?
the door opened and a lady came out.
it was wendy.
they all whipped off their hats.
she looked properly surprised, and this was just how they had hoped she would look.
"where am i?"
she said.
of course slightly was the first to get his word in.
"wendy lady," he said rapidly, "for you we built this house."
"oh, say you're pleased," cried nibs.
"lovely, darling house," wendy said, and they were the very words they had hoped she would say.
"and we are your children," cried the twins.
then all went on their knees, and holding out their arms cried," o wendy lady, be our mother."
"ought i?"
wendy said, all shining.
"of course it's frightfully fascinating, but you see i am only a little girl.
i have no real experience."
"that does n't matter," said peter, as if he were the only person present who knew all about it, though he was really the one who knew least.
"what we need is just a nice motherly person."
"oh dear!"
wendy said, "you see i feel that is exactly what i am."
"it is, it is," they all cried; "we saw it at once."
"very well," she said," i will do my best.
come inside at once, you naughty children; i am sure your feet are damp.
and before i put you to bed i have just time to finish the story of cinderella."
in they went; i do n't know how there was room for them, but you can squeeze very tight in the neverland.
and that was the first of the many joyous evenings they had with wendy.
by and by she tucked them up in the great bed in the home under the trees, but she herself slept that night in the little house, and peter kept watch outside with drawn sword, for the pirates could be heard carousing far away and the wolves were on the prowl.
the little house looked so cosy and safe in the darkness, with a bright light showing through its blinds, and the chimney smoking beautifully, and peter standing on guard.
after a time he fell asleep, and some unsteady fairies had to climb over him on their way home from an orgy.
any of the other boys obstructing the fairy path at night they would have mischiefed, but they just tweaked peter's nose and passed on.
-lsb- illustration: peter on guard -rsb- chapter vii the home under the ground one of the first things peter did next day was to measure wendy and john and michael for hollow trees.
hook, you remember, had sneered at the boys for thinking they needed a tree apiece, but this was ignorance, for unless your tree fitted you it was difficult to go up and down, and no two of the boys were quite the same size.
once you fitted, you drew in your breath at the top, and down you went at exactly the right speed, while to ascend you drew in and let out alternately, and so wriggled up.
of course, when you have mastered the action you are able to do these things without thinking of them, and then nothing can be more graceful.
but you simply must fit, and peter measures you for your tree as carefully as for a suit of clothes: the only difference being that the clothes are made to fit you, while you have to be made to fit the tree.
usually it is done quite easily, as by your wearing too many garments or too few; but if you are bumpy in awkward places or the only available tree is an odd shape, peter does some things to you, and after that you fit.
once you fit, great care must be taken to go on fitting, and this, as wendy was to discover to her delight, keeps a whole family in perfect condition.
wendy and michael fitted their trees at the first try, but john had to be altered a little.
after a few days" practice they could go up and down as gaily as buckets in a well.
and how ardently they grew to love their home under the ground; especially wendy.
it consisted of one large room, as all houses should do, with a floor in which you could dig if you wanted to go fishing, and in this floor grew stout mushrooms of a charming colour, which were used as stools.
a never tree tried hard to grow in the centre of the room, but every morning they sawed the trunk through, level with the floor.
by tea-time it was always about two feet high, and then they put a door on top of it, the whole thus becoming a table; as soon as they cleared away, they sawed off the trunk again, and thus there was more room to play.
there was an enormous fireplace which was in almost any part of the room where you cared to light it, and across this wendy stretched strings, made of fibre, from which she suspended her washing.
the bed was tilted against the wall by day, and let down at 6.30, when it filled nearly half the room; and all the boys except michael slept in it, lying like sardines in a tin.
there was a strict rule against turning round until one gave the signal, when all turned at once.
michael should have used it also; but wendy would have a baby, and he was the littlest, and you know what women are, and the short and the long of it is that he was hung up in a basket.
it was rough and simple, and not unlike what baby bears would have made of an underground house in the same circumstances.
but there was one recess in the wall, no larger than a bird-cage, which was the private apartment of tinker bell.
it could be shut off from the rest of the home by a tiny curtain, which tink, who was most fastidious, always kept drawn when dressing or undressing.
no woman, however large, could have had a more exquisite boudoir and bedchamber combined.
the couch, as she always called it, was a genuine queen mab, with club legs; and she varied the bedspreads according to what fruit-blossom was in season.
her mirror was a puss-in-boots, of which there are now only three, unchipped, known to the fairy dealers; the wash-stand was pie-crust and reversible, the chest of drawers an authentic charming the sixth, and the carpet and rugs of the best -lrb- the early -rrb- period of margery and robin.
there was a chandelier from tiddly winks for the look of the thing, but of course she lit the residence herself.
tink was very contemptuous of the rest of the house, as indeed was perhaps inevitable; and her chamber, though beautiful, looked rather conceited, having the appearance of a nose permanently turned up.
i suppose it was all especially entrancing to wendy, because those rampagious boys of hers gave her so much to do.
really there were whole weeks when, except perhaps with a stocking in the evening, she was never above ground.
the cooking, i can tell you, kept her nose to the pot.
their chief food was roasted breadfruit, yams, cocoa-nuts, baked pig, mammee-apples, tappa rolls and bananas, washed down with calabashes of poe-poe; but you never exactly knew whether there would be a real meal or just a make-believe, it all depended upon peter's whim.
he could eat, really eat, if it was part of a game, but he could not stodge just to feel stodgy, which is what most children like better than anything else; the next best thing being to talk about it.
make-believe was so real to him that during a meal of it you could see him getting rounder.
of course it was trying, but you simply had to follow his lead, and if you could prove to him that you were getting loose for your tree he let you stodge.
wendy's favourite time for sewing and darning was after they had all gone to bed.
then, as she expressed it, she had a breathing time for herself; and she occupied it in making new things for them, and putting double pieces on the knees, for they were all most frightfully hard on their knees.
at this high-handed proceeding, and the threat which accompanied it, jack's patience gave out, and catching up caesar, as he thought, sent him flying after the retreating tyrant with the defiant declaration, -- "keep them, then, and your old book, too!
i wo n't look at it till you give all my stamps back and say you are sorry.
so now!"
it was all over before mamma could interfere, or jill do more than clutch and cling to the gum-brush.
frank vanished unharmed, but the poor book dashed against the wall to fall half open on the floor, its gay cover loosened, and its smooth leaves crushed by the blow.
""it's the album!
o jack, how could you?"
cried jill, dismayed at sight of the precious book so maltreated by the owner.
""thought it was the other.
guess it is n't hurt much.
did n't mean to hit him, any way.
he does provoke me so," muttered jack, very red and shamefaced as his mother picked up the book and laid it silently on the table before him.
he did not know what to do with himself, and was thankful for the stamps still left him, finding great relief in making faces as he plucked them one by one from his mortified countenance.
jill looked on, half glad, half sorry that her savage showed such signs of unconverted ferocity, and mrs. minot went on writing letters, wearing the grave look her sons found harder to bear than another person's scolding.
no one spoke for a moment, and the silence was becoming awkward when gus appeared in a rubber suit, bringing a book to jack from laura and a note to jill from lotty.
""look here, you just trundle me into my den, please, i'm going to have a nap, it's so dull to-day i do n't feel like doing much," said jack, when gus had done his errands, trying to look as if he knew nothing about the fracas.
jack folded his arms and departed like a warrior borne from the battle-field, to be chaffed unmercifully for a "pepper-pot," while gus made him comfortable in his own room.
""i heard once of a boy who threw a fork at his brother and put his eye out.
but he did n't mean to, and the brother forgave him, and he never did so any more," observed jill, in a pensive tone, wishing to show that she felt all the dangers of impatience, but was sorry for the culprit.
""did the boy ever forgive himself?"
asked mrs. minot.
""no,'m; i suppose not.
but jack did n't hit frank, and feels real sorry, i know."
""he might have, and hurt him very much.
our actions are in our own hands, but the consequences of them are not.
remember that, my dear, and think twice before you do anything."
""yes,'m, i will;" and jill composed herself to consider what missionaries usually did when the natives hurled tomahawks and boomerangs at one another, and defied the rulers of the land.
mrs. minot wrote one page of a new letter, then stopped, pushed her papers about, thought a little, and finally got up, saying, as if she found it impossible to resist the yearning of her heart for the naughty boy, -- "i am going to see if jack is covered up, he is so helpless, and liable to take cold.
do n't stir till i come back."
""no,'m, i wo n't."
away went the tender parent to find her son studying caesar for dear life, and all the more amiable for the little gust which had blown away the temporary irritability.
the brothers were often called "thunder and lightning," because frank lowered and growled and was a good while clearing up, while jack's temper came and went like a flash, and the air was all the clearer for the escape of dangerous electricity.
of course mamma had to stop and deliver a little lecture, illustrated by sad tales of petulant boys, and punctuated with kisses which took off the edge of these afflicting narratives.
jill meantime meditated morally on the superiority of her own good temper over the hasty one of her dear playmate, and just when she was feeling unusually uplifted and secure, alas!
like so many of us, she fell, in the most deplorable manner.
glancing about the room for something to do, she saw a sheet of paper lying exactly out of reach, where it had fluttered from the table unperceived.
at first her eye rested on it as carelessly as it did on the stray stamp frank had dropped; then, as if one thing suggested the other, she took it into her head that the paper was frank's composition, or, better still, a note to annette, for the two corresponded when absence or weather prevented the daily meeting at school.
""would n't it be fun to keep it till he gives back jack's stamps?
it would plague him so if it was a note, and i do believe it is, for compo's do n't begin with two words on one side.
i'll get it, and jack and i will plan some way to pay him off, cross thing!"
forgetting her promise not to stir, also how dishonorable it was to read other people's letters, jill caught up the long-handled hook, often in use now, and tried to pull the paper nearer.
it would not come at once, for a seam in the carpet held it, and jill feared to tear or crumple it if she was not very careful.
the hook was rather heavy and long for her to manage, and jack usually did the fishing, so she was not very skilful; and just as she was giving a particularly quick jerk, she lost her balance, fell off the sofa, and dropped the pole with a bang.
""oh, my back!"
was all she could think or say as she felt the jar all through her little body, and a corresponding fear in her guilty little mind that someone would come and find out the double mischief she had been at.
for a moment she lay quite still to recover from the shock, then as the pain passed she began to wonder how she should get back, and looked about her to see if she could do it alone.
she thought she could, as the sofa was near and she had improved so much that she could sit up a little if the doctor would have let her.
she was gathering herself together for the effort, when, within arm's reach now, she saw the tempting paper, and seized it with glee, for in spite of her predicament she did want to tease frank.
a glance showed that it was not the composition nor a note, but the beginning of a letter from mrs. minot to her sister, and jill was about to lay it down when her own name caught her eye, and she could not resist reading it.
hard words to write of one so young, doubly hard to read, and impossible to forget.
""dear lizzie, -- jack continues to do very well, and will soon be up again.
but we begin to fear that the little girl is permanently injured in the back.
she is here, and we do our best for her; but i never look at her without thinking of lucinda snow, who, you remember, was bedridden for twenty years, owing to a fall at fifteen.
poor little janey does not know yet, and i hope" -- there it ended, and "poor little janey's" punishment for disobedience began that instant.
she thought she was getting well because she did not suffer all the time, and every one spoke cheerfully about "by and by."
now she knew the truth, and shut her eyes with a shiver as she said, low, to herself, -- "twenty years!
i could n't bear it; oh, i could n't bear it!"
a very miserable jill lay on the floor, and for a while did not care who came and found her; then the last words of the letter -- "i hope" -- seemed to shine across the blackness of the dreadful "twenty years" and cheer her up a bit, for despair never lives long in young hearts, and jill was a brave child.
""that is why mammy sighs so when she dresses me, and every one is so good to me.
perhaps mrs. minot does n't really know, after all.
she was dreadfully scared about jack, and he is getting well.
i'd like to ask doctor, but he might find out about the letter.
oh, dear, why did n't i keep still and let the horrid thing alone!"
as she thought that, jill pushed the paper away, pulled herself up, and with much painful effort managed to get back to her sofa, where she laid herself down with a groan, feeling as if the twenty years had already passed over her since she tumbled off.
""i've told a lie, for i said i would n't stir.
i've hurt my back, i've done a mean thing, and i've got paid for it.
a nice missionary i am; i'd better begin at home, as mammy told me to;" and jill groaned again, remembering her mother's words.
""now i've got another secret to keep all alone, for i'd be ashamed to tell the girls.
i guess i'll turn round and study my spelling; then no one will see my face."
jill looked the picture of a good, industrious child as she lay with her back to the large table, her book held so that nothing was to be seen but one cheek and a pair of lips moving busily.
fortunately, it is difficult for little sinners to act a part, and, even if the face is hidden, something in the body seems to betray the internal remorse and shame.
usually, jill lay flat and still; now her back was bent in a peculiar way as she leaned over her book, and one foot wagged nervously, while on the visible cheek was a spanish stamp with a woman's face looking through the black bars, very suggestively, if she had known it.
how long the minutes seemed till some one came, and what a queer little jump her heart gave when mrs. minot's voice said, cheerfully, "jack is all right, and, i declare, so is jill.
i really believe there is a telegraph still working somewhere between you two, and each knows what the other is about without words."
""i did n't have any other book handy, so i thought i'd study awhile," answered jill, feeling that she deserved no praise for her seeming industry.
she cast a sidelong glance as she spoke, and seeing that mrs. minot was looking for the letter, hid her face and lay so still she could hear the rustle of the paper as it was taken from the floor.
it was well she did not also see the quick look the lady gave her as she turned the letter and found a red stamp sticking to the under side, for this unlucky little witness told the story.
mrs. minot remembered having seen the stamp lying close to the sofa when she left the room, for she had had half a mind to take it to jack, but did not, thinking frank's plan had some advantages.
she also recollected that a paper flew off the table, but being in haste she had not stopped to see what it was.
now, the stamp and the letter could hardly have come together without hands, for they lay a yard apart, and here, also, on the unwritten portion of the page, was the mark of a small green thumb.
jill had been winding wool for a stripe in her new afghan, and the green ball lay on her sofa.
these signs suggested and confirmed what mrs. minot did not want to believe; so did the voice, attitude, and air of jill, all very unlike her usual open, alert ways.
the kind lady could easily forgive the reading of her letter since the girl had found such sad news there, but the dangers of disobedience were serious in her case, and a glance showed that she was suffering either in mind or body -- perhaps both.
""i will wait for her to tell me.
she is an honest child, and the truth will soon come out," thought mrs. minot, as she took a clean sheet, and jill tried to study.
""shall i hear your lesson, dear?
jack means to recite his like a good boy, so suppose you follow his example," she said, presently.
""i do n't know as i can say it, but i'll try."
jill did try, and got on bravely till she came to the word "permanent;" there she hesitated, remembering where she saw it last.
""do you know what that means?"
asked her teacher, thinking to help her on by defining the word.
""always -- for a great while -- or something like that; does n't it?"
faltered jill, with a tight feeling in her throat, and the color coming up, as she tried to speak easily, yet felt so shame-stricken she could not.
""are you in pain, my child?
never mind the lesson; tell me, and i'll do something for you."
the kind words, the soft hand on her hot cheek, and the pity in the eyes that looked at her, were too much for jill.
a sob came first, and then the truth, told with hidden face and tears that washed the blush away, and set free the honest little soul that could not hide its fault from such a friend.
""i knew it all before, and was sure you would tell me, else you would not be the child i love and like to help so well."
then, while she soothed jill's trouble, mrs. minot told her story and showed the letter, wishing to lessen, if possible, some part of the pain it had given.
""sly old stamp!
to go and tell on me when i meant to own up, and get some credit if i could, after being so mean and bad," said jill, smiling through her tears when she saw the tell-tale witnesses against her.
""you had better stick it in your book to remind you of the bad consequences of disobedience, then perhaps this lesson will leave a "permanent" impression on your mind and memory," answered mrs. minot, glad to see her natural gayety coming back, and hoping that she had forgotten the contents of the unfortunate letter.
but she had not; and presently, when the sad affair had been talked over and forgiven, jill asked, slowly, as she tried to put on a brave look, -- "please tell me about lucinda snow.
if i am to be like her, i might as well know how she managed to bear it so long."
""i'm sorry you ever heard of her, and yet perhaps it may help you to bear your trial, dear, which i hope will never be as heavy a one as hers.
this lucinda i knew for years, and though at first i thought her fate the saddest that could be, i came at last to see how happy she was in spite of her affliction, how good and useful and beloved."
""why, how could she be?
what did she do?"
cried jill, forgetting her own troubles to look up with an open, eager face again.
""she was so patient, other people were ashamed to complain of their small worries; so cheerful, that her own great one grew lighter; so industrious, that she made both money and friends by pretty things she worked and sold to her many visitors.
and, best of all, so wise and sweet that she seemed to get good out of everything, and make her poor room a sort of chapel where people went for comfort, counsel, and an example of a pious life.
so, you see, lucinda was not so very miserable after all."
""well, if i could not be as i was, i'd like to be a woman like that.
only, i hope i shall not!"
answered jill, thoughtfully at first, then coming out so decidedly with the last words that it was evident the life of a bedridden saint was not at all to her mind.
""so do i; and i mean to believe that you will not.
meantime, we can try to make the waiting as useful and pleasant as possible.
this painful little back will be a sort of conscience to remind you of what you ought to do and leave undone, and so you can be learning obedience.
then, when the body is strong, it will have formed a good habit to make duty easier; and my lucinda can be a sweet example, even while lying here, if she chooses."
""can i?"
and jill's eyes were full of softer tears as the comfortable, cheering words sank into her heart, to blossom slowly by and by into her life, for this was to be a long lesson, hard to learn, but very useful in the years to come.
when the boys returned, after the latin was recited and peace restored, jack showed her a recovered stamp promptly paid by frank, who was as just as he was severe, and jill asked for the old red one, though she did not tell why she wanted it, nor show it put away in the spelling-book, a little seal upon a promise made to be kept.
chapter viii.
merry and molly now let us see how the other missionaries got on with their tasks.
farmer grant was a thrifty, well-to-do man, anxious to give his children greater advantages than he had enjoyed, and to improve the fine place of which he was justly proud.
mrs. grant was a notable housewife, as ambitious and industrious as her husband, but too busy to spend any time on the elegancies of life, though always ready to help the poor and sick like a good neighbor and christian woman.
the three sons -- tom, dick, and harry -- were big fellows of seventeen, nineteen, and twenty-one; the first two on the farm, and the elder in a store just setting up for himself.
kind-hearted but rough-mannered youths, who loved merry very much, but teased her sadly about her "fine lady airs," as they called her dainty ways and love of beauty.
merry was a thoughtful girl, full of innocent fancies, refined tastes, and romantic dreams, in which no one sympathized at home, though she was the pet of the family.
it did seem, to an outsider, as if the delicate little creature had got there by mistake, for she looked very like a tea-rose in a field of clover and dandelions, whose highest aim in life was to feed cows and help make root beer.
when the girls talked over the new society, it pleased merry very much, and she decided not only to try and love work better, but to convert her family to a liking for pretty things, as she called her own more cultivated tastes.
""i will begin at once, and show them that i do n't mean to shirk my duty, though i do want to be nice," thought she, as she sat at supper one night and looked about her, planning her first move.
not a very cheering prospect for a lover of the beautiful, certainly, for the big kitchen, though as neat as wax, had nothing lovely in it, except a red geranium blooming at the window.
nor were the people all that could be desired, in some respects, as they sat about the table shovelling in pork and beans with their knives, drinking tea from their saucers, and laughing out with a hearty "haw, haw," when anything amused them.
yet the boys were handsome, strong specimens, the farmer a hale, benevolent-looking man, the housewife a pleasant, sharp-eyed matron, who seemed to find comfort in looking often at the bright face at her elbow, with the broad forehead, clear eyes, sweet mouth, and quiet voice that came like music in among the loud masculine ones, or the quick, nervous tones of a woman always in a hurry.
merry's face was so thoughtful that evening that her father observed it, for, when at home, he watched her as one watches a kitten, glad to see anything so pretty, young, and happy, at its play.
""little daughter has got something on her mind, i mistrust.
come and tell father all about it," he said, with a sounding slap on his broad knee as he turned his chair from the table to the ugly stove, where three pairs of wet boots steamed underneath, and a great kettle of cider apple-sauce simmered above.
""when i've helped clear up, i'll come and talk.
now, mother, you sit down and rest; roxy and i can do everything," answered merry, patting the old rocking-chair so invitingly that the tired woman could not resist, especially as watching the kettle gave her an excuse for obeying.
""well, i do n't care if i do, for i've been on my feet since five o'clock.
be sure you cover things up, and shut the buttery door, and put the cat down cellar, and sift your meal.
i'll see to the buckwheats last thing before i go to bed."
mrs. grant subsided with her knitting, for her hands were never idle; tom tilted his chair back against the wall and picked his teeth with his pen-knife; dick got out a little pot of grease, to make the boots water-tight; and harry sat down at the small table to look over his accounts, with an important air, -- for every one occupied this room, and the work was done in the out-kitchen behind.
merry hated clearing up, but dutifully did every distasteful task, and kept her eye on careless roxy till all was in order; then she gladly went to perch on her father's knee, seeing in all the faces about her the silent welcome they always wore for the "little one."
""yes, i do want something, but i know you will say it is silly," she began, as her father pinched her blooming cheek, with the wish that his peaches would ever look half as well.
""should n't wonder if it was a doll now;" and mr. grant stroked her head with an indulgent smile, as if she was about six instead of fifteen.
""why, father, you know i do n't!
i have n't played with dollies for years and years.
no; i want to fix up my room pretty, like jill's.
i'll do it all myself, and only want a few things, for i do n't expect it to look as nice as hers."
indignation gave merry courage to state her wishes boldly, though she knew the boys would laugh.
they did, and her mother said in a tone of surprise, -- "why, child, what more can you want?
i'm sure your room is always as neat as a new pin, thanks to your bringing up, and i told you to have a fire there whenever you wanted to."
""let me have some old things out of the garret, and i'll show you what i want.
it is neat, but so bare and ugly i hate to be there.
i do so love something pretty to look at!"
and merry gave a little shiver of disgust as she turned her eyes away from the large greasy boot dick was holding up to be sure it was well lubricated all round.
""so do i, and that's a fact.
i could n't get on without my pretty girl here, any way.
why, she touches up the old place better than a dozen flower-pots in full blow," said the farmer, as his eye went from the scarlet geranium to the bright young face so near his own.
""i wish i had a dozen in the sitting-room window.
mother says they are not tidy, but i'd keep them neat, and i know you'd like it," broke in merry, glad of the chance to get one of the long-desired wishes of her heart fulfilled.
""i'll fetch you some next time i go over to ballad's.
tell me what you want, and we'll have a posy bed somewhere round, see if we do n't," said her father, dimly understanding what she wanted.
""now, if mother says i may fix my room, i shall be satisfied, and i'll do my chores without a bit of fuss, to show how grateful i am," said the girl, thanking her father with a kiss, and smiling at her mother so wistfully that the good woman could not refuse.
""you may have anything you like out of the blue chest.
there's a lot of things there that the moths got at after grandma died, and i could n't bear to throw or give'em away.
trim up your room as you like, and mind you do n't forget your part of the bargain," answered mrs. grant, seeing profit in the plan.
""i wo n't; i'll work all the morning to-morrow, and in the afternoon i'll get ready to show you what i call a nice, pretty room," answered merry, looking so pleased it seemed as if another flower had blossomed in the large bare kitchen.
she kept her word, and the very stormy afternoon when jill got into trouble, merry was working busily at her little bower.
in the blue chest she found a variety of treasures, and ignoring the moth holes, used them to the best advantage, trying to imitate the simple comfort with a touch of elegance which prevailed in mrs. minot's back bedroom.
three faded red-moreen curtains went up at the windows over the chilly paper shades, giving a pleasant glow to the bare walls.
a red quilt with white stars, rather the worse for many washings, covered the bed, and a gay cloth the table, where a judicious arrangement of books and baskets concealed the spots.
the little air-tight stove was banished, and a pair of ancient andirons shone in the fire-light.
grandma's last and largest braided rug lay on the hearth, and her brass candlesticks adorned the bureau, over the mirror of which was festooned a white muslin skirt, tied up with merry's red sash.
this piece of elegance gave the last touch to her room, she thought, and she was very proud of it, setting forth all her small store of trinkets in a large shell, with an empty scent bottle, and a clean tidy over the pincushion.
on the walls she hung three old-fashioned pictures, which she ventured to borrow from the garret till better could be found.
one a mourning piece, with a very tall lady weeping on an urn in a grove of willows, and two small boys in knee breeches and funny little square tails to their coats, looking like cherubs in large frills.
the other was as good as a bonfire, being an eruption of vesuvius, and very lurid indeed, for the bay of naples was boiling like a pot, the red sky raining rocks, and a few distracted people lying flat upon the shore.
the third was a really pretty scene of children dancing round a may-pole, for though nearly a hundred years old, the little maids smiled and the boys pranced as gayly as if the flowers they carried were still alive and sweet.
""now i'll call them all to see, and say that it is pretty.
then i'll enjoy it, and come here when things look dismal and bare everywhere else," said merry, when at last it was done.
she had worked all the afternoon, and only finished at supper time, so the candles had to be lighted that the toilette might look its best, and impress the beholders with an idea of true elegance.
unfortunately, the fire smoked a little, and a window was set ajar to clear the room; an evil-disposed gust blew in, wafting the thin drapery within reach of the light, and when merry threw open the door proudly thinking to display her success, she was horrified to find the room in a blaze, and half her labor all in vain.
the conflagration was over in a minute, however, for the boys tore down the muslin and stamped out the fire with much laughter, while mrs. grant bewailed the damage to her carpet, and poor merry took refuge in her father's arms, refusing to be comforted in spite of his kind commendation of "grandma's fixins."
the third little missionary had the hardest time of all, and her first efforts were not much more satisfactory nor successful than the others.
her father was away from morning till night, and then had his paper to read, books to keep, or "a man to see down town," so that, after a hasty word at tea, he saw no more of the children till another evening, as they were seldom up at his early breakfast.
he thought they were well taken care of, for miss bathsheba dawes was an energetic, middle-aged spinster when she came into the family, and had been there fifteen years, so he did not observe, what a woman would have seen at once, that miss bat was getting old and careless, and everything about the house was at sixes and sevens.
she took good care of him, and thought she had done her duty if she got three comfortable meals, nursed the children when they were ill, and saw that the house did not burn up.
so maria louisa and napoleon bonaparte got on as they could, without the tender cares of a mother.
molly had been a happy-go-lucky child, contented with her pets, her freedom, and little boo to love; but now she was just beginning to see that they were not like other children, and to feel ashamed of it.
""papa is busy, but miss bat ought to see to us; she is paid for it, and goodness knows she has an easy time now, for if i ask her to do anything, she groans over her bones, and tells me young folks should wait on themselves.
i take all the care of boo off her hands, but i ca n't wash my own things, and he has n't a decent trouser to his blessed little legs.
i'd tell papa, but it would n't do any good; he'd only say, "yes, child, yes, i'll attend to it," and never do a thing."
this used to be molly's lament, when some especially trying event occurred, and if the girls were not there to condole with her, she would retire to the shed-chamber, call her nine cats about her, and, sitting in the old bushel basket, pull her hair about her ears, and scold all alone.
the cats learned to understand this habit, and nobly did their best to dispel the gloom which now and then obscured the sunshine of their little mistress.
some of them would creep into her lap and purr till the comfortable sound soothed her irritation; the sedate elders sat at her feet blinking with such wise and sympathetic faces, that she felt as if half a dozen solomons were giving her the sagest advice; while the kittens frisked about, cutting up their drollest capers till she laughed in spite of herself.
when the laugh came, the worst of the fit was over, and she soon cheered up, dismissing the consolers with a pat all round, a feast of good things from miss bat's larder, and the usual speech: -- "well, dears, it's of no use to worry.
i guess we shall get along somehow, if we do n't fret."
with which wise resolution, molly would leave her retreat and freshen up her spirits by a row on the river or a romp with boo, which always finished the case.
now, however, she was bound to try the new plan and do something toward reforming not only the boy's condition, but the disorder and discomfort of home.
""i'll play it is siam, and this the house of a native, and i'm come to show the folks how to live nicely.
miss bat wo n't know what to make of it, and i ca n't tell her, so i shall get some fun out of it, any way," thought molly, as she surveyed the dining-room the day her mission began.
the prospect was not cheering; and, if the natives of siam live in such confusion, it is high time they were attended to.
the breakfast-table still stood as it was left, with slops of coffee on the cloth; bits of bread, egg-shells, and potato-skins lay about, and one lonely sausage was cast away in the middle of a large platter.
the furniture was dusty, stove untidy, and the carpet looked as if crumbs had been scattered to chickens who declined their breakfast.
boo was sitting on the sofa, with his arm through a hole in the cover, hunting for some lost treasure put away there for safe keeping, like a little magpie as he was.
molly fancied she washed and dressed him well enough; but to-day she seemed to see more clearly, and sighed as she thought of the hard job in store for her if she gave him the thorough washing he needed, and combed out that curly mop of hair.
""i'll clear up first and do that by and by.
i ought to have a nice little tub and good towels, like mrs. minot, and i will, too, if i buy them myself," she said, piling up cups with an energy that threatened destruction to handles.
miss bat, who was trailing about the kitchen, with her head pinned up in a little plaid shawl, was so surprised by the demand for a pan of hot water and four clean towels, that she nearly dropped her snuff-box, chief comfort of her lazy soul.
""what new whimsey now?
generally, the dishes stand round till i have time to pick'em up, and you are off coasting or careering somewhere.
well, this tidy fit wo n't last long, so i may as well make the most of it," said miss bat, as she handed out the required articles, and then pushed her spectacles from the tip of her sharp nose to her sharper black eyes for a good look at the girl who stood primly before her, with a clean apron on and her hair braided up instead of flying wildly about her shoulders.
""umph!"
was all the comment that miss bat made on this unusual neatness, and she went on scraping her saucepans, while molly returned to her work, very well pleased with the effect of her first step, for she felt that the bewilderment of miss bat would be a constant inspiration to fresh efforts.
an hour of hard work produced an agreeable change in the abode of the native, for the table was cleared, room swept and dusted, fire brightened, and the holes in the sofa-covering were pinned up till time could be found to mend them.
to be sure, rolls of lint lay in corners, smears of ashes were on the stove hearth, and dust still lurked on chair rounds and table legs.
but too much must not be expected of a new convert, so the young missionary sat down to rest, well pleased and ready for another attempt as soon as she could decide in what direction it should be made.
she quailed before boo as she looked at the unconscious innocent peacefully playing with the spotted dog, now bereft of his tail, and the lone sausage with which he was attempting to feed the hungry animal, whose red mouth always gaped for more.
""it will be an awful job, and he is so happy i wo n't plague him yet.
guess i'll go and put my room to rights first, and pick up some clean clothes to put on him, if he is alive after i get through with him," thought molly, foreseeing a stormy passage for the boy, who hated a bath as much as some people hate a trip across the atlantic.
up she went, and finding the fire out felt discouraged, thought she would rest a little more, so retired under the blankets to read one of the christmas books.
the dinner-bell rang while she was still wandering happily in "nelly's silver mine," and she ran down to find that boo had laid out a railroad all across her neat room, using bits of coal for sleepers and books for rails, over which he was dragging the yellow sled laden with a dismayed kitten, the tailless dog, and the remains of the sausage, evidently on its way to the tomb, for boo took bites at it now and then, no other lunch being offered him.
""oh dear!
why ca n't boys play without making such a mess," sighed molly, picking up the feathers from the duster with which boo had been trying to make a "cocky-doo" of the hapless dog.
""i'll wash him right after dinner, and that will keep him out of mischief for a while," she thought, as the young engineer unsuspiciously proceeded to ornament his already crocky countenance with squash, cranberry sauce, and gravy, till he looked more like a fiji chief in full war-paint than a christian boy.
""i want two pails of hot water, please, miss bat, and the big tub," said molly, as the ancient handmaid emptied her fourth cup of tea, for she dined with the family, and enjoyed her own good cooking in its prime.
""what are you going to wash now?"
""boo -- i'm sure he needs it enough;" and molly could not help laughing as the victim added to his brilliant appearance by smearing the colors all together with a rub of two grimy hands, making a fine "turner" of himself.
""now, maria louisa bemis, you ai n't going to cut up no capers with that child!
the idea of a hot bath in the middle of the day, and him full of dinner, and croupy into the bargain!
wet a corner of a towel at the kettle-spout and polish him off if you like, but you wo n't risk his life in no bath-tubs this cold day."
miss bat's word was law in some things, so molly had to submit, and took boo away, saying, loftily, as she left the room, -- "i shall ask father, and do it to-night, for i will not have my brother look like a pig."
""my patience!
how the siamese do leave their things round," she exclaimed, as she surveyed her room after making up the fire and polishing off boo.
""i'll put things in order, and then mend up my rags, if i can find my thimble.
now, let me see;" and she went to exploring her closet, bureau, and table, finding such disorder everywhere that her courage nearly gave out.
she had clothes enough, but all needed care; even her best dress had two buttons off, and her sunday hat but one string.
shoes, skirts, books, and toys lay about, and her drawers were a perfect chaos of soiled ruffles, odd gloves, old ribbons, boot lacings, and bits of paper.
""oh, my heart, what a muddle!
mrs. minot would n't think much of me if she could see that," said molly, recalling how that lady once said she could judge a good deal of a little girl's character and habits by a peep at her top drawer, and went on, with great success, to guess how each of the school-mates kept her drawer.
""come, missionary, clear up, and do n't let me find such a glory-hole again, or i'll report you to the society," said molly, tipping the whole drawer-full out upon the bed, and beguiling the tiresome job by keeping up the new play.
twilight came before it was done, and a great pile of things loomed up on her table, with no visible means of repair, -- for molly's work-basket was full of nuts, and her thimble down a hole in the shed-floor, where the cats had dropped it in their play.
""i'll ask bat for hooks and tape, and papa for some money to buy scissors and things, for i do n't know where mine are.
glad i ca n't do any more now!
being neat is such hard work!"
and molly threw herself down on the rug beside the old wooden cradle in which boo was blissfully rocking, with a cargo of toys aboard.
she watched her time, and as soon as her father had done supper, she hastened to say, before he got to his desk, -- "please, papa, i want a dollar to get some brass buttons and things to fix boo's clothes with.
he wore a hole in his new trousers coasting down the kembles" steps.
and ca n't i wash him?
he needs it, and miss bat wo n't let me have a tub."
""certainly, child, certainly; do what you like, only do n't keep me.
i must be off, or i shall miss jackson, and he's the man i want;" and, throwing down two dollars instead of one, mr. bemis hurried away, with a vague impression that boo had swallowed a dozen brass buttons, and miss bat had been coasting somewhere in a bath-pan; but catching jackson was important, so he did not stop to investigate.
armed with the paternal permission, molly carried her point, and oh, what a dreadful evening poor boo spent!
first, he was decoyed upstairs an hour too soon, then put in a tub by main force and sternly scrubbed, in spite of shrieks that brought miss bat to the locked door to condole with the sufferer, scold the scrubber, and depart, darkly prophesying croup before morning.
""he always howls when he is washed; but i shall do it, since you wo n't, and he must get used to it.
i will not have people tell me he's neglected, if i can help it," cried molly, working away with tears in her eyes -- for it was as hard for her as for boo; but she meant to be thorough for once in her life, no matter what happened.
when the worst was over, she coaxed him with candy and stories till the long task of combing out the curls was safely done; then, in the clean night-gown with a blue button newly sewed on, she laid him in bed, worn out, but sweet as a rose.
""now, say your prayers, darling, and go to sleep with the nice red blanket all tucked round so you wo n't get cold," said molly, rather doubtful of the effect of the wet head.
""no, i wo n't!
going to sleep now!
" and boo shut his eyes wearily, feeling that his late trials had not left him in a prayerful mood.
""then you'll be a real little heathen, as mrs. pecq called you, and i do n't know what i shall do with you," said molly, longing to cuddle rather than scold the little fellow, whose soul needed looking after as well as his body.
""no, no; i wo n't be a heevin!
i do n't want to be frowed to the trockindiles.
i will say my prayers!
oh, i will!"
and, rising in his bed, boo did so, with the devotion of an infant samuel, for he remembered the talk when the society was formed.
molly thought her labors were over for that night, and soon went to bed, tired with her first attempts.
but toward morning she was wakened by the hoarse breathing of the boy, and was forced to patter away to miss bat's room, humbly asking for the squills, and confessing that the prophecy had come to pass.
""i knew it!
bring the child to me, and do n't fret.
i'll see to him, and next time you do as i say," was the consoling welcome she received as the old lady popped up a sleepy but anxious face in a large flannel cap, and shook the bottle with the air of a general who had routed the foe before and meant to do it again.
leaving her little responsibility in miss bat's arms, molly retired to wet her pillow with a few remorseful tears, and to fall asleep, wondering if real missionaries ever killed their pupils in the process of conversion.
so the girls all failed in the beginning; but they did not give up, and succeeded better next time, as we shall see.
chapter ix.
the debating club "look here, old man, we ought to have a meeting.
holidays are over, and we must brace up and attend to business," said frank to gus, as they strolled out of the schoolyard one afternoon in january, apparently absorbed in conversation, but in reality waiting for a blue cloud and a scarlet feather to appear on the steps.
""all right.
when, where, and what?"
asked gus, who was a man of few words.
""to-night, our house, subject, "shall girls go to college with us?"
mother said we had better be making up our minds, because every one is talking about it, and we shall have to be on one side or the other, so we may as well settle it now," answered frank, for there was an impression among the members that all vexed questions would be much helped by the united eloquence and wisdom of the club.
""very good; i'll pass the word and be there.
hullo, neddy!
the d.c. meets to-night, at minot's, seven sharp.
co-ed, & c.," added gus, losing no time, as a third boy came briskly round the corner, with a little bag in his hand.
""i'll come.
got home an hour earlier to-night, and thought i'd look you up as i went by," responded ed devlin, as he took possession of the third post, with a glance toward the schoolhouse to see if a seal-skin cap, with a long, yellow braid depending therefrom, was anywhere in sight.
""very good of you, i'm sure," said gus, ironically, not a bit deceived by this polite attention.
""the longest way round is sometimes the shortest way home, hey, ed?"
and frank gave him a playful poke that nearly sent him off his perch.
then they all laughed at some joke of their own, and gus added, "no girls coming to hear us to-night.
do n't think it, my son.
""more's the pity," and ed shook his head regretfully over the downfall of his hopes.
""ca n't help it; the other fellows say they spoil the fun, so we have to give in, sometimes, for the sake of peace and quietness.
do n't mind having them a bit myself," said frank, in such a tone of cheerful resignation that they laughed again, for the "triangle," as the three chums were called, always made merry music.
""we must have a game party next week.
the girls like that, and so do i," candidly observed gus, whose pleasant parlors were the scene of many such frolics.
""and so do your sisters and your cousins and your aunts," hummed ed, for gus was often called admiral because he really did possess three sisters, two cousins, and four aunts, besides mother and grandmother, all living in the big house together.
the boys promptly joined in the popular chorus, and other voices all about the yard took it up, for the "pinafore" epidemic raged fearfully in harmony village that winter.
""how's business?"
asked gus, when the song ended, for ed had not returned to school in the autumn, but had gone into a store in the city.
""dull; things will look up toward spring, they say.
i get on well enough, but i miss you fellows dreadfully;" and ed put a hand on the broad shoulder of each friend, as if he longed to be a school-boy again.
""better give it up and go to college with me next year," said frank, who was preparing for boston university, while gus fitted for harvard.
""no; i've chosen business, and i mean to stick to it, so do n't you unsettle my mind.
have you practised that march?"
asked ed, turning to a gayer subject, for he had his little troubles, but always looked on the bright side of things.
""skating is so good, i do n't get much time.
come early, and we'll have a turn at it."
""i will.
must run home now."
""pretty cold loafing here."
""mail is in by this time."
and with these artless excuses the three boys leaped off the posts, as if one spring moved them, as a group of girls came chattering down the path.
the blue cloud floated away beside frank, the scarlet feather marched off with the admiral, while the fur cap nodded to the gray hat as two happy faces smiled at each other.
the same thing often happened, for twice a-day the streets were full of young couples walking to and from school together, smiled at by the elders, and laughed at by the less susceptible boys and girls, who went alone or trooped along in noisy groups.
the prudent mothers had tried to stop this guileless custom, but found it very difficult, as the fathers usually sympathized with their sons, and dismissed the matter with the comfortable phrase, "never mind; boys will be boys."
""not forever," returned the anxious mammas, seeing the tall lads daily grow more manly, and the pretty daughters fast learning to look demure when certain names were mentioned.
it could not be stopped without great parental sternness and the danger of deceit, for co-education will go on outside of school if not inside, and the safest way is to let sentiment and study go hand in hand, with teachers and parents to direct and explain the great lesson all are the better for learning soon or late.
so the elders had to give in, acknowledging that this sudden readiness to go to school was a comfort, that the new sort of gentle emulation worked wonders in lazy girls and boys, and that watching these "primrose friendships" bud, blossom, and die painless deaths, gave a little touch of romance to their own work-a-day lives.
""on the whole i'd rather have my sons walking, playing, and studying with bright, well-mannered girls, than always knocking about with rough boys," said mrs. minot at one of the mothers" meetings, where the good ladies met to talk over their children, and help one another to do their duty by them.
""i find that gus is more gentle with his sisters since juliet took him in hand, for he wants to stand well with her, and they report him if he troubles them.
i really see no harm in the little friendship, though i never had any such when i was a girl," said mrs. burton, who adored her one boy and was his confidante.
""my merry seems to be contented with her brothers so far, but i should n't wonder if i had my hands full by and by," added mrs. grant, who already foresaw that her sweet little daughter would be sought after as soon as she should lengthen her skirts and turn up her bonny brown hair.
molly loo had no mother to say a word for her, but she settled matters for herself by holding fast to merry, and declaring that she would have no escort but faithful boo.
it is necessary to dwell a moment upon this new amusement, because it was not peculiar to harmony village, but appears everywhere as naturally as the game parties and croquet which have taken the place of the husking frolics and apple-bees of olden times, and it is impossible to dodge the subject if one attempts to write of boys and girls as they really are nowadays.
""here, my hero, see how you like this.
if it suits, you will be ready to march as soon as the doctor gives the word," said ralph, coming into the bird room that evening with a neat little crutch under his arm.
""ha, ha, that looks fine!
i'd like to try it right off, but i wo n't till i get leave.
did you make it yourself, ral?"
asked jack, handling it with delight, as he sat bolt upright, with his leg on a rest, for he was getting on capitally now.
""mostly.
rather a neat job, i flatter myself."
""i should say so.
what a clever fellow you are!
any new inventions lately?"
asked frank, coming up to examine and admire.
""only an anti-snoring machine and an elbow-pad," answered ralph, with a twinkle in his eye, as if reminded of something funny.
""go on, and tell about them.
i never heard of an anti-snorer.
jack better have one," said frank, interested at once.
""well, a rich old lady kept her family awake with that lively music, so she sent to shirtman and codleff for something to stop it.
they thought it was a good joke, and told me to see what i could do.
i thought it over, and got up the nicest little affair you ever saw.
it went over the mouth, and had a tube to fit the ear, so when the lady snored she woke herself up and stopped it.
it suited exactly.
i think of taking out a patent," concluded ralph, joining in the boys" laugh at the droll idea.
""what was the pad?"
asked frank, returning to the small model of an engine he was making.
""oh, that was a mere trifle for a man who had a tender elbow-joint and wanted something to protect it.
i made a little pad to fit on, and his crazy-bone was safe."
""i planned to have you make me a new leg if this one was spoilt," said jack, sure that his friend could invent anything under the sun.
""i'd do my best for you.
i made a hand for a fellow once, and that got me my place, you know," answered ralph, who thought little of such mechanical trifles, and longed to be painting portraits or modelling busts, being an artist as well as an inventor.
here gus, ed, and several other boys came in, and the conversation became general.
grif, chick, and brickbat were three young gentlemen whose own respectable names were usually ignored, and they cheerfully answered to these nicknames.
as the clock struck seven, frank, who ruled the club with a rod of iron when chairman, took his place behind the study table.
seats stood about it, and a large, shabby book lay before gus, who was secretary, and kept the records with a lavish expenditure of ink, to judge by the blots.
the members took their seats, and nearly all tilted back their chairs and put their hands in their pockets, to keep them out of mischief; for, as every one knows, it is impossible for two lads to be near each other and refrain from tickling or pinching.
frank gave three raps with an old croquet-mallet set on a short handle, and with much dignity opened the meeting.
""gentlemen, the business of the club will be attended to, and then we will discuss the question, "shall girls go to our colleges?"
the secretary will now read the report of the last meeting."
clearing his throat, gus read the following brief and elegant report: -- "club met, december 18th, at the house of g. burton, esq..
subject: "is summer or winter best fun?"
a lively pow-wow.
about evenly divided.
j. flint fined five cents for disrespect to the chair.
a collection of forty cents taken up to pay for breaking a pane of glass during a free fight of the members on the door-step.
e. devlin was chosen secretary for the coming year, and a new book contributed by the chairman."
""that's all."
""is there any other business before the meeting?"
asked frank, as the reader closed the old book with a slam and shoved the new one across the table.
ed rose, and glancing about him with an appealing look, said, as if sure his proposition would not be well received, "i wish to propose the name of a new member.
bob walker wants to join, and i think we ought to let him.
he is trying to behave well, and i am sure we could help him.
ca n't we?"
all the boys looked sober, and joe, otherwise brickbat, said, bluntly, "i wo n't.
he's a bad lot, and we do n't want any such here.
let him go with chaps of his own sort."
""that is just what i want to keep him from!
he's a good-hearted boy enough, only no one looks after him; so he gets into scrapes, as we should, if we were in his place, i dare say.
he wants to come here, and would be so proud if he was let in, i know he'd behave.
come now, let's give him a chance," and ed looked at gus and frank, sure that if they stood by him he should carry his point.
but gus shook his head, as if doubtful of the wisdom of the plan, and frank said gravely: "you know we made the rule that the number should never be over eight, and we can not break it."
""you need n't.
i ca n't be here half the time, so i will resign and let bob have my place," began ed, but he was silenced by shouts of "no, no, you sha n't!"
""we wo n't let you off!"
""club would go to smash, if you back out!"
""let him have my place; i'm the youngest, and you wo n't miss me," cried jack, bound to stand by ed at all costs.
""we might do that," said frank, who did object to small boys, though willing to admit this particular one.
""better make a new rule to have ten members, and admit both bob and tom grant," said ralph, whereat grif grinned and joe scowled, for one lad liked merry's big brother and the other did not.
""that's a good idea!
put it to vote," said gus, too kind-hearted to shut the door on any one.
""first i want to ask if all you fellows are ready to stand by bob, out of the club as well as in, for it wo n't do much good to be kind to him here and cut him at school and in the street," said ed, heartily in earnest about the matter.
""i will!"
cried jack, ready to follow where his beloved friend led, and the others nodded, unwilling to be outdone by the youngest member.
""good!
with all of us to lend a hand, we can do a great deal; and i tell you, boys, it is time, if we want to keep poor bob straight.
we all turn our backs on him, so he loafs round the tavern, and goes with fellows we do n't care to know.
but he is n't bad yet, and we can keep him up, i'm sure, if we just try.
i hope to get him into the lodge, and that will be half the battle, wo n't it, frank?"
added ed, sure that this suggestion would have weight with the honorable chairman.
""bring him along; i'm with you!"
answered frank, making up his mind at once, for he had joined the temperance lodge four years ago, and already six boys had followed his example.
""he is learning to smoke, but we'll make him drop it before it leads to worse.
you can help him there, admiral, if you only will," added ed, giving a grateful look at one friend, and turning to the other.
""i'm your man;" and gus looked as if he knew what he promised, for he had given up smoking to oblige his father, and kept his word like a hero.
""you other fellows can do a good deal by just being kind and not twitting him with old scrapes, and i'll do anything i can for you all to pay for this;" and ed sat down with a beaming smile, feeling that his cause was won.
the vote was taken, and all hands went up, for even surly joe gave in; so bob and tom were duly elected, and proved their gratitude for the honor done them by becoming worthy members of the club.
it was only boys" play now, but the kind heart and pure instincts of one lad showed the others how to lend a helping hand to a comrade in danger, and win him away from temptation to the safer pastimes of their more guarded lives.
well pleased with themselves -- for every genuine act or word, no matter how trifling it seems, leaves a sweet and strengthening influence behind -- the members settled down to the debate, which was never very long, and often only an excuse for fun of all sorts.
""ralph, gus, and ed are for, and brickbat, grif, and chick against, i suppose?"
said frank, surveying his company like a general preparing for battle.
""no, sir!
i believe in co-everything!"
cried chick, a mild youth, who loyally escorted a chosen damsel home from school every day.
a laugh greeted this bold declaration, and chick sat down, red but firm.
""i'll speak for two since the chairman ca n't, and jack wo n't go against those who pet him most to death," said joe, who, not being a favorite with the girls, considered them a nuisance and lost no opportunity of telling them so.
""fire away, then, since you are up;" commanded frank.
""well," began joe, feeling too late how much he had undertaken, "i do n't know a great deal about it, and i do n't care, but i do not believe in having girls at college.
they do n't belong there, nobody wants'em, and they'd better be at home darning their stockings."
""yours, too," put in ralph, who had heard that argument so often he was tired of it.
""of course; that's what girls are for.
i do n't mind'em at school, but i'd just as soon they had a room to themselves.
we should get on better.""
you would if mabel was n't in your class and always ahead of you," observed ed, whose friend was a fine scholar, and he very proud of the fact.
""look here, if you fellows keep interrupting, i wo n't sit down for half an hour," said joe, well knowing that eloquence was not his gift, but bound to have his say out.
deep silence reigned, for that threat quelled the most impatient member, and joe prosed on, using all the arguments he had ever heard, and paying off several old scores by sly hits of a personal nature, as older orators often do.
""it is clear to my mind that boys would get on better without any girls fooling round.
as for their being as smart as we are, it is all nonsense, for some of'em cry over their lessons every day, or go home with headaches, or get mad and scold all recess, because something "is n't fair."
no, sir; girls ai n't meant to know much, and they ca n't.
wise folks say so and i believe'em.
have n't got any sisters myself, and i do n't want any, for they do n't seem to amount to much, according to those who do have'em."
groans from gus and ed greeted the closing remarks of the ungallant joe, who sat down, feeling that he had made somebody squirm.
up jumped grif, the delight of whose life was practical jokes, which amiable weakness made him the terror of the girls, though they had no other fault to find with the merry lad.
""mr. chairman, the ground i take is this: girls have not the strength to go to college with us.
they could n't row a race, go on a lark, or take care of themselves, as we do.
they are all well enough at home, and i like them at parties, but for real fun and go i would n't give a cent for them," began grif, whose views of a collegiate life were confined to the enjoyments rather than the studies of that festive period.
""i have tried them, and they ca n't stand anything.
they scream if you tell them there is a mouse in the room, and run if they see a big dog.
i just put a cockroach in molly's desk one day, and when she opened it she jumped as if she was shot."
so did the gentlemen of the club, for at that moment half-a-dozen fire-crackers exploded under the chair grif had left, and flew wildly about the room.
order was with difficulty restored, the mischievous party summarily chastised and commanded to hold his tongue, under penalty of ejectment from the room if he spoke again.
firmly grasping that red and unruly member, grif composed himself to listen, with his nose in the air and his eyes shining like black beads.
ed was always the peace-maker, and now, when he rose with his engaging smile, his voice fell like oil upon the troubled waters, and his bright face was full of the becoming bashfulness which afflicts youths of seventeen when touching upon such subjects of newly acquired interest as girls and their pleasant but perplexing ways.
""it seems to me we have hardly considered the matter enough to be able to say much.
but i think that school would be awfully dry and dismal without -- ahem!
-- any young ladies to make it nice.
i would n't give a pin to go if there was only a crowd of fellows, though i like a good game as well as any man.
i pity any boy who has no sisters," continued ed, warming up as he thought of his own, who loved him dearly, as well they might, for a better brother never lived.
""home would n't be worth having without them to look after a fellow, to keep him out of scrapes, help him with his lessons, and make things jolly for his friends.
i tell you we ca n't do without girls, and i'm not ashamed to say that i think the more we see of them, and try to be like them in many ways, the better men we shall be by and by."
""hear!
hear!"
cried frank, in his deepest tone, for he heartily agreed to that, having talked the matter over with his mother, and received much light upon things which should always be set right in young heads and hearts.
and who can do this so wisely and well as mothers, if they only will?
feeling that his sentiments had been approved, and he need not be ashamed of the honest color in his cheeks, ed sat down amid the applause of his side, especially of jack, who pounded so vigorously with his crutch that mrs. pecq popped in her head to see if anything was wanted.
""no, thank you, ma'am, we were only cheering ed," said gus, now upon his legs, and rather at a loss what to say till mrs. pecq's appearance suggested an idea, and he seized upon it.
""my honored friend has spoken so well that i have little to add.
i agree with him, and if you want an example of what girls can do, why, look at jill.
she's young, i know, but a first-rate scholar for her age.
as for pluck, she is as brave as a boy, and almost as smart at running, rowing, and so on.
of course, she ca n't play ball -- no girl can; their arms are not made right to throw -- but she can catch remarkably well.
i'll say that for her.
now, if she and mabel -- and -- and -- some others i could name, are so clever and strong at the beginning, i do n't see why they should n't keep up and go along with us all through.
i'm willing, and will do what i can to help other fellows" sisters as i'd like to have them help mine.
and i'll punch their heads if they do n't;" and gus subsided, assured, by a burst of applause, that his manly way of stating the case met with general approval.
""we shall be happy to hear from our senior member if he will honor us with a few remarks," said frank, with a bow to ralph.
no one ever knew whom he would choose to personate, for he never spoke in his own character.
now he rose slowly, put one hand in his bosom, and fixing his eye sternly on grif, who was doing something suspicious with a pin, gave them a touch of sergeant buzfuz, from the pickwick trial, thinking that the debate was not likely to throw much light on the subject under discussion.
in the midst of this appeal to "me lud and gentlemen of the jury," he suddenly paused, smoothed his hair down upon his forehead, rolled up his eyes, and folding his hands, droned out mr. chadband's sermon on peace, delivered over poor jo, and ending with the famous lines: -- "oh, running stream of sparkling joy, to be a glorious human boy!"
then, setting his hair erect with one comprehensive sweep, he caught up his coat-skirts over his arm, and, assuming a parliamentary attitude, burst into a comical medley, composed of extracts from jefferson brick's and lafayette kettle's speeches, and elijah pogram's defiance, from "martin chuzzlewit."
gazing at gus, who was convulsed with suppressed merriment, he thundered forth: -- "in the name of our common country, sir, in the name of that righteous cause in which we are jined, and in the name of the star-spangled banner, i thank you for your eloquent and categorical remarks.
you, sir, are a model of a man fresh from natur's mould.
a true-born child of this free hemisphere; verdant as the mountains of our land; bright and flowin" as our mineral licks; unspiled by fashion as air our boundless perearers.
rough you may be; so air our barrs.
wild you may be; so air our buffalers.
but, sir, you air a child of freedom, and your proud answer to the tyrant is, that your bright home is in the settin" sun.
and, sir, if any man denies this fact, though it be the british lion himself, i defy him.
let me have him here!"
-- smiting the table, and causing the inkstand to skip -- "here, upon this sacred altar!
here, upon the ancestral ashes cemented with the glorious blood poured out like water on the plains of chickabiddy lick.
alone i dare that lion, and tell him that freedom's hand once twisted in his mane, he rolls a corse before me, and the eagles of the great republic scream, ha, ha!"
by this time the boys were rolling about in fits of laughter; even sober frank was red and breathless, and jack lay back, feebly squealing, as he could laugh no more.
in a moment ralph was as meek as a quaker, and sat looking about him with a mildly astonished air, as if inquiring the cause of such unseemly mirth.
a knock at the door produced a lull, and in came a maid with apples.
""time's up; fall to and make yourselves comfortable," was the summary way in which the club was released from its sterner duties and permitted to unbend its mighty mind for a social half-hour, chiefly devoted to whist, with an indian war-dance as a closing ceremony.
chapter x.
the dramatic club while jack was hopping gayly about on his crutches, poor jill was feeling the effects of her second fall, and instead of sitting up, as she hoped to do after six weeks of rest, she was ordered to lie on a board for two hours each day.
not an easy penance, by any means, for the board was very hard, and she could do nothing while she lay there, as it did not slope enough to permit her to read without great fatigue of both eyes and hands.
so the little martyr spent her first hour of trial in sobbing, the second in singing, for just as her mother and mrs. minot were deciding in despair that neither she nor they could bear it, jill suddenly broke out into a merry chorus she used to hear her father sing: -- "faut jouer le mirliton, faut jouer le mirlitir, faut jouer le mirliter, mir -- li -- ton."
the sound of the brave little voice was very comforting to the two mothers hovering about her, and jack said, with a look of mingled pity and admiration, as he brandished his crutch over the imaginary foes, -- "that's right!
sing away, and we'll play you are an indian captive being tormented by your enemies, and too proud to complain.
i'll watch the clock, and the minute time is up i'll rush in and rescue you."
jill laughed, but the fancy pleased her, and she straightened herself out under the gay afghan, while she sang, in a plaintive voice, another little french song her father taught her: -- "j'avais une colombe blanche, j'avais un blanc petit pigeon, tous deux volaient, de branche en branche, jusqu'au fate de mon dongeon: mais comme un coup de vent d'automne, s'est abattu l, l'pervier, et ma colombe si mignonne ne revient plus au colombier."
""my poor jean had a fine voice, and always hoped the child would take after him.
it would break his heart to see her lying there trying to cheer her pain with the songs he used to sing her to sleep with," said mrs. pecq, sadly.
""she really has a great deal of talent, and when she is able she shall have some lessons, for music is a comfort and a pleasure, sick or well," answered mrs. minot, who had often admired the fresh voice, with its pretty accent.
here jill began the canadian boat-song, with great vigor, as if bound to play her part of indian victim with spirit, and not disgrace herself by any more crying.
all knew the air, and joined in, especially jack, who came out strong on the "row, brothers, row," but ended in a squeak on a high note, so drolly, that the rest broke down.
so the hour that began with tears ended with music and laughter, and a new pleasure to think of for the future.
after that day jill exerted all her fortitude, for she liked to have the boys call her brave and admire the cheerful way in which she endured two hours of discomfort.
she found she could use her zither as it lay upon her breast, and every day the pretty music began at a certain hour, and all in the house soon learned to love and listen for it.
even the old cook set open her kitchen door, saying pitifully, "poor darlint, hear how purty she's singin", wid the pain, on that crewel boord.
it's a little saint, she is.
may her bed above be aisy!"
frank would lift her gently on and off, with a kind word that comforted her immensely, and gentle ed would come and teach her new bits of music, while the other fellows were frolicking below.
ralph added his share to her amusement, for he asked leave to model her head in clay, and set up his work in a corner, coming to pat, scrape, and mould whenever he had a spare minute, amusing her by his lively chat, and showing her how to shape birds, rabbits, and queer faces in the soft clay, when the songs were all sung and her fingers tired of the zither.
the girls sympathized very heartily with her new trial, and brought all manner of gifts to cheer her captivity.
merry and molly made a gay screen by pasting pictures on the black cambric which covered the folding frame that stood before her to keep the draughts from her as she lay on her board.
bright birds and flowers, figures and animals, covered one side, and on the other they put mottoes, bits of poetry, anecdotes, and short stories, so that jill could lie and look or read without the trouble of holding a book.
it was not all done at once, but grew slowly, and was a source of instruction as well as amusement to them all, as they read carefully, that they might make good selections.
but the thing that pleased jill most was something jack did, for he gave up going to school, and stayed at home nearly a fortnight after he might have gone, all for her sake.
the day the doctor said he might try it if he would be very careful, he was in great spirits, and limped about, looking up his books, and planning how he would astonish his mates by the rapidity of his recovery.
when he sat down to rest he remembered jill, who had been lying quietly behind the screen, while he talked with his mother, busy putting fresh covers on the books.
""she is so still, i guess she is asleep," thought jack, peeping round the corner.
no, not asleep, but lying with her eyes fixed on the sunny window, beyond which the bright winter world sparkled after a fresh snow-fall.
the jingle of sleigh-bells could be heard, the laughter of boys and girls on their way to school, all the pleasant stir of a new day of happy work and play for the rest of the world, more lonely, quiet, and wearisome than ever to her since her friend and fellow-prisoner was set free and going to leave her.
jack understood that patient, wistful look, and, without a word, went back to his seat, staring at the fire so soberly, that his mother presently asked: "what are you thinking of so busily, with that pucker in your forehead?"
""i've about made up my mind that i wo n't go to school just yet," answered jack, slowly lifting his head, for it cost him something to give up the long-expected pleasure.
""why not?"
and mrs. minot looked much surprised, till jack pointed to the screen, and, making a sad face to express jill's anguish, answered in a cheerful tone, "well, i'm not sure that it is best.
doctor did not want me to go, but said i might because i teased.
i shall be sure to come to grief, and then every one will say," i told you so," and that is so provoking.
i'd rather keep still a week longer.
had n't i better?"
his mother smiled and nodded as she said, sewing away at much-abused old caesar, as if she loved him, "do as you think best, dear.
i always want you at home, but i do n't wonder you are rather tired of it after this long confinement."
""i say, jill, should i be in your way if i did n't go to school till the first of february?"
called jack, laughing to himself at the absurdity of the question.
""not much!"
answered a glad voice from behind the screen, and he knew the sorrowful eyes were shining with delight, though he could not see them.
""well, i guess i may as well, and get quite firm on my legs before i start.
another week or so will bring me up if i study hard, so i shall not lose my time.
i'll tackle my latin as soon as it's ready, mother."
jack got a hearty kiss with the neatly covered book, and mamma loved him for the little sacrifice more than if he had won a prize at school.
he did get a reward, for, in five minutes from the time he decided, jill was singing like a bobolink, and such a medley of merry music came from behind the screen, that it was a regular morning concert.
she did not know then that he stayed for her sake, but she found it out soon after, and when the time came did as much for him, as we shall see.
it proved a wise decision, for the last part of january was so stormy jack could not have gone half the time.
so, while the snow drifted, and bitter winds raged, he sat snugly at home amusing jill, and getting on bravely with his lessons, for frank took great pains with him to show his approbation of the little kindness, and, somehow, the memory of it seemed to make even the detested latin easier.
with february fair weather set in, and jack marched happily away to school, with jill's new mittens on his hands, mamma nodding from the door-step, and frank ready to give him a lift on the new sled, if the way proved too long or too rough.
""i shall not have time to miss him now, for we are to be very busy getting ready for the twenty-second.
the dramatic club meets to-night, and would like to come here, if they may, so i can help?"
said jill, as mrs. minot came up, expecting to find her rather low in her mind.
""certainly; and i have a basket of old finery i looked up for the club when i was rummaging out bits of silk for your blue quilt," answered the good lady, who had set up a new employment to beguile the hours of jack's absence.
when the girls arrived, that evening, they found mrs. chairwoman surrounded by a strew of theatrical properties, enjoying herself very much.
all brought such contributions as they could muster, and all were eager about a certain tableau which was to be the gem of the whole, they thought.
jill, of course, was not expected to take any part, but her taste was good, so all consulted her as they showed their old silks, laces, and flowers, asking who should be this, and who that.
all wanted to be the "sleeping beauty," for that was the chosen scene, with the slumbering court about the princess, and the prince in the act of awakening her.
jack was to be the hero, brave in his mother's velvet cape, red boots, and a real sword, while the other boys were to have parts of more or less splendor.
""mabel should be the beauty, because her hair is so lovely," said juliet, who was quite satisfied with her own part of the queen.
""no, merry ought to have it, as she is the prettiest, and has that splendid veil to wear," answered molly, who was to be the maid of honor, cuffing the little page, boo.
""i do n't care a bit, but my feather would be fine for the princess, and i do n't know as emma would like to have me lend it to any one else," said annette, waving a long white plume over her head, with girlish delight in its grace.
""i should think the white silk dress, the veil, and the feather ought to go together, with the scarlet crape shawl and these pearls.
that would be sweet, and just what princesses really wear," advised jill, who was stringing a quantity of old roman pearls.
""we all want to wear the nice things, so let us draw lots.
would n't that be the fairest way?"
asked merry, looking like a rosy little bride, under a great piece of illusion, which had done duty in many plays.
""the prince is light, so the princess must be darkish.
we ought to choose the girl who will look best, as it is a picture.
i heard miss delano say so, when the ladies got up the tableaux, last winter, and every one wanted to be cleopatra," said jill decidedly.
""you choose, and then if we ca n't agree we will draw lots," proposed susy, who, being plain, knew there was little hope of her getting a chance in any other way.
so all stood in a row, and jill, from her sofa, surveyed them critically, feeling that the one jack would really prefer was not among the number.
""i choose that one, for juliet wants to be queen, molly would make faces, and the others are too big or too light," pronounced jill, pointing to merry, who looked pleased, while mabel's face darkened, and susy gave a disdainful sniff.
""you'd better draw lots, and then there will be no fuss.
ju and i are out of the fight, but you three can try, and let this settle the matter," said molly, handing jill a long strip of paper.
all agreed to let it be so, and when the bits were ready drew in turn.
this time fate was evidently on merry's side, and no one grumbled when she showed the longest paper.
""go and dress, then come back, and we'll plan how we are to be placed before we call up the boys," commanded jill, who was manager, since she could be nothing else.
the girls retired to the bedroom and began to "rig up," as they called it; but discontent still lurked among them, and showed itself in sharp words, envious looks, and disobliging acts.
""am i to have the white silk and the feather?"
asked merry, delighted with the silvery shimmer of the one and the graceful droop of the other, though both were rather shabby.
""you can use your own dress.
i do n't see why you should have everything," answered susy, who was at the mirror, putting a wreath of scarlet flowers on her red head, bound to be gay since she could not be pretty.
""i think i'd better keep the plume, as i have n't anything else that is nice, and i'm afraid emma would n't like me to lend it," added annette, who was disappointed that mabel was not to be the beauty."
i do n't intend to act at all!"
declared mabel, beginning to braid up her hair with a jerk, out of humor with the whole affair."
i think you are a set of cross, selfish girls to back out and keep your nice things just because you ca n't all have the best part.
i'm ashamed of you!"
scolded molly, standing by merry, who was sadly surveying her mother's old purple silk, which looked like brown in the evening.
""i'm going to have miss delano's red brocade for the queen, and i shall ask her for the yellow-satin dress for merry when i go to get mine, and tell her how mean you are," said juliet, frowning under her gilt-paper crown as she swept about in a red table-cloth for train till the brocade arrived.
""perhaps you'd like to have mabel cut her hair off, so merry can have that, too?"
cried susy, with whom hair was a tender point.
""light hair is n't wanted, so ju will have to give hers, or you'd better borrow miss bat's frisette," added mabel, with a scornful laugh.
""i just wish miss bat was here to give you girls a good shaking.
do let someone else have a chance at the glass, you peacock!"
exclaimed molly loo, pushing susy aside to arrange her own blue turban, out of which she plucked the pink pompon to give merry.
""do n't quarrel about me.
i shall do well enough, and the scarlet shawl will hide my ugly dress," said merry, from the corner, where she sat waiting for her turn at the mirror.
as she spoke of the shawl her eye went in search of it, and something that she saw in the other room put her own disappointment out of her head.
jill lay there all alone, rather tired with the lively chatter, and the effort it cost her not to repine at being shut out from the great delight of dressing up and acting.
her eyes were closed, her net was off, and all the pretty black curls lay about her shoulders as one hand idly pulled them out, while the other rested on the red shawl, as if she loved its glowing color and soft texture.
she was humming to herself the little song of the dove and the donjon, and something in the plaintive voice, the solitary figure, went straight to merry's gentle heart.
""poor jilly ca n't have any of the fun," was the first thought; then came a second, that made merry start and smile, and in a minute whisper so that all but jill could hear her, "girls, i'm not going to be the princess.
but i've thought of a splendid one!"
""who?"
asked the rest, staring at one another, much surprised by this sudden announcement.
""hush!
speak low, or you will spoil it all.
look in the bird room, and tell me if that is n't a prettier princess than i could make?"
they all looked, but no one spoke, and merry added, with sweet eagerness, "it is the only thing poor jill can be, and it would make her so happy; jack would like it, and it would please every one, i know.
perhaps she will never walk again, so we ought to be very good to her, poor dear."
the last words, whispered with a little quiver in the voice, settled the matter better than hours of talking, for girls are tender-hearted creatures, and not one of these but would have gladly given all the pretty things she owned to see jill dancing about well and strong again.
like a ray of sunshine the kind thought touched and brightened every face; envy, impatience, vanity, and discontent flew away like imps at the coming of the good fairy, and with one accord they all cried, -- "it will be lovely; let us go and tell her!"
forgetting their own adornment, out they trooped after merry, who ran to the sofa, saying, with a smile which was reflected in all the other faces, "jill, dear, we have chosen another princess, and i know you'll like her."
""who is it?"
asked jill, languidly, opening her eyes without the least suspicion of the truth.
""i'll show you;" and taking the cherished veil from her own head, merry dropped it like a soft cloud over jill; annette added the long plume, susy laid the white silk dress about her, while juliet and mabel lifted the scarlet shawl to spread it over the foot of the sofa, and molly tore the last ornament from her turban, a silver star, to shine on jill's breast.
then they all took hands and danced round the couch, singing, as they laughed at her astonishment, "there she is!
there she is!
princess jill as fine as you please!
""do you really mean it?
but can i?
is it fair?
how sweet of you!
come here and let me hug you all!"
cried jill, in a rapture at the surprise, and the pretty way in which it was done.
the grand scene on the twenty-second was very fine, indeed; but the little tableau of that minute was infinitely better, though no one saw it, as jill tried to gather them all in her arms, for that nosegay of girlish faces was the sweeter, because each one had sacrificed her own little vanity to please a friend, and her joy was reflected in the eyes that sparkled round the happy princess.
""oh, you dear, kind things, to think of me and give me all your best clothes!
i never shall forget it, and i'll do anything for you.
yes!
i'll write and ask mrs. piper to lend us her ermine cloak for the king.
see if i do n't!"
shrieks of delight hailed this noble offer, for no one had dared to borrow the much-coveted mantle, but all agreed that the old lady would not refuse jill.
it was astonishing how smoothly everything went after this, for each was eager to help, admire, and suggest, in the friendliest way; and when all were dressed, the boys found a party of very gay ladies waiting for them round the couch, where lay the brightest little princess ever seen.
""oh, jack, i'm to act!
was n't it dear of the girls to choose me?
do n't they look lovely?
are n't you glad?"
cried jill, as the lads stared and the lasses blushed and smiled, well pleased at the frank admiration the boyish faces showed.
""i guess i am!
you are a set of trumps, and we'll give you a first-class spread after the play to pay for it.
wo n't we, fellows?"
answered jack, much gratified, and feeling that now he could act his own part capitally.
""we will.
it was a handsome thing to do, and we think well of you for it.
hey, gus?"
and frank nodded approvingly at all, though he looked only at annette.
""as king of this crowd, i call it to order," said gus, retiring to the throne, where juliet sat laughing in her red table-cloth.
""we'll have "the fair one with golden locks" next time; i promise you that," whispered ed to mabel, whose shining hair streamed over her blue dress like a mantle of gold-colored silk.
""girls are pretty nice things, are n't they?
kind of'em to take jill in.
do n't molly look fine, though?"
and grif's black eyes twinkled as he planned to pin her skirts to merry's at the first opportunity.
""susy looks as gay as a feather-duster.
i like her.
she never snubs a fellow," said joe, much impressed with the splendor of the court ladies.
the boys" costumes were not yet ready, but they posed well, and all had a merry time, ending with a game of blind-man's - buff, in which every one caught the right person in the most singular way, and all agreed as they went home in the moonlight that it had been an unusually jolly meeting.
so the fairy play woke the sleeping beauty that lies in all of us, and makes us lovely when we rouse it with a kiss of unselfish good-will, for, though the girls did not know it then, they had adorned themselves with pearls more precious than the waxen ones they decked their princess in.
chapter xi.
""down brakes" the greatest people have their weak points, and the best-behaved boys now and then yield to temptation and get into trouble, as everybody knows.
frank was considered a remarkably well-bred and proper lad, and rather prided himself on his good reputation, for he never got into scrapes like the other fellows.
well, hardly ever, for we must confess that at rare intervals his besetting sin overcame his prudence, and he proved himself an erring, human boy.
steam-engines had been his idols for years, and they alone could lure him from the path of virtue.
once, in trying to investigate the mechanism of a toy specimen, which had its little boiler and ran about whistling and puffing in the most delightful way, he nearly set the house afire by the sparks that dropped on the straw carpet.
another time, in trying experiments with the kitchen tea-kettle, he blew himself up, and the scars of that explosion he still carried on his hands.
he was long past such childish amusements now, but his favorite haunt was the engine-house of the new railroad, where he observed the habits of his pets with never-failing interest, and cultivated the good-will of stokers and brakemen till they allowed him many liberties, and were rather flattered by the admiration expressed for their iron horses by a young gentleman who liked them better even than his greek and latin.
there was not much business doing on this road as yet, and the two cars of the passenger-trains were often nearly empty, though full freight-trains rolled from the factory to the main road, of which this was only a branch.
so things went on in a leisurely manner, which gave frank many opportunities of pursuing his favorite pastime.
he soon knew all about no. 11, his pet engine, and had several rides on it with bill, the engineer, so that he felt at home there, and privately resolved that when he was a rich man he would have a road of his own, and run trains as often as he liked.
gus took less interest than his friend in the study of steam, but usually accompanied him when he went over after school to disport himself in the engine-house, interview the stoker, or see if there was anything new in the way of brakes.
one afternoon they found no. 11 on the side-track, puffing away as if enjoying a quiet smoke before starting.
no cars were attached, and no driver was to be seen, for bill was off with the other men behind the station-house, helping the expressman, whose horse had backed down a bank and upset the wagon.
""good chance for a look at the old lady," said frank, speaking of the engine as bill did, and jumping aboard with great satisfaction, followed by gus.
""i'd give ten dollars if i could run her up to the bend and back," he added, fondly touching the bright brass knobs and glancing at the fire with a critical eye.
""you could n't do it alone," answered gus, sitting down on the grimy little perch, willing to indulge his mate's amiable weakness.
""give me leave to try?
steam is up, and i could do it as easy as not;" and frank put his hand on the throttle-valve, as if daring gus to give the word.
""fire up and make her hum!"
laughed gus, quoting bill's frequent order to his mate, but with no idea of being obeyed.
""all right; i'll just roll her up to the switch and back again.
i've often done it with bill;" and frank cautiously opened the throttle-valve, threw back the lever, and the great thing moved with a throb and a puff.
""steady, old fellow, or you'll come to grief.
here, do n't open that!"
shouted gus, for just at that moment joe appeared at the switch, looking ready for mischief.
""wish he would; no train for twenty minutes, and we could run up to the bend as well as not," said frank, getting excited with the sense of power, as the monster obeyed his hand so entirely that it was impossible to resist prolonging the delight.
""by george, he has!
stop her!
back her!
hold on, frank!"
cried gus, as joe, only catching the words "open that!"
obeyed, without the least idea that they would dare to leave the siding.
but they did, for frank rather lost his head for a minute, and out upon the main track rolled no. 11 as quietly as a well-trained horse taking a familiar road.
""now you've done it!
i'll give you a good thrashing when i get back!"
roared gus, shaking his fist at joe, who stood staring, half-pleased, half-scared, at what he had done.
""are you really going to try it?"
asked gus, as they glided on with increasing speed, and he, too, felt the charm of such a novel adventure, though the consequences bid fair to be serious.
""yes, i am," answered frank, with the grim look he always wore when his strong will got the upper hand.
""bill will give it to us, any way, so we may as well have our fun out.
if you are afraid, i'll slow down and you can jump off," and his brown eyes sparkled with the double delight of getting his heart's desire and astonishing his friend at the same time by his skill and coolness.
""go ahead.
i'll jump when you do;" and gus calmly sat down again, bound in honor to stand by his mate till the smash came, though rather dismayed at the audacity of the prank.
""do n't you call this just splendid?"
exclaimed frank, as they rolled along over the crossing, past the bridge, toward the curve, a mile from the station.
""not bad.
they are yelling like mad after us.
better go back, if you can," said gus, who was anxiously peering out, and, in spite of his efforts to seem at ease, not enjoying the trip a particle.
""let them yell.
i started to go to the curve, and i'll do it if it costs me a hundred dollars.
no danger; there's no train under twenty minutes, i tell you," and frank pulled out his watch.
but the sun was in his eyes, and he did not see clearly, or he would have discovered that it was later than he thought.
on they went, and were just rounding the bend when a shrill whistle in front startled both boys, and drove the color out of their cheeks.
""it's the factory train!"
cried gus, in a husky tone, as he sprang to his feet.
""no; it's the five-forty on the other road," answered frank, with a queer thrill all through him at the thought of what might happen if it was not.
both looked straight ahead as the last tree glided by, and the long track lay before them, with the freight train slowly coming down.
for an instant, the boys stood as if paralyzed.
""jump!"
said gus, looking at the steep bank on one side and the river on the other, undecided which to try.
""sit still!"
commanded frank, collecting his wits, as he gave a warning whistle to retard the on-coming train, while he reversed the engine and went back faster than he came.
a crowd of angry men was waiting for them, and bill stood at the open switch in a towering passion as no. 11 returned to her place unharmed, but bearing two pale and frightened boys, who stepped slowly and silently down, without a word to say for themselves, while the freight train rumbled by on the main track.
frank and gus never had a very clear idea as to what occurred during the next few minutes, but vaguely remembered being well shaken, sworn at, questioned, threatened with direful penalties, and finally ordered off the premises forever by the wrathful depot-master.
joe was nowhere to be seen, and as the two culprits walked away, trying to go steadily, while their heads spun round, and all the strength seemed to have departed from their legs, frank said, in an exhausted tone, -- "come down to the boat-house and rest a minute."
both were glad to get out of sight, and dropped upon the steps red, rumpled, and breathless, after the late exciting scene.
gus generously forebore to speak, though he felt that he was the least to blame; and frank, after eating a bit of snow to moisten his dry lips, said, handsomely, -- "now, do n't you worry, old man.
i'll pay the damages, for it was my fault.
joe will dodge, but i wo n't, so make your mind easy.
""we sha'n' t hear the last of this in a hurry," responded gus, relieved, yet anxious, as he thought of the reprimand his father would give him.
""i hope mother wo n't hear of it till i tell her quietly myself.
she will be so frightened, and think i'm surely smashed up, if she is told in a hurry;" and frank gave a shiver, as all the danger he had run came over him suddenly.
""i thought we were done for when we saw that train.
guess we should have been if you had not had your wits about you.
i always said you were a cool one;" and gus patted frank's back with a look of great admiration, for, now that it was all over, he considered it a very remarkable performance.
""which do you suppose it will be, fine or imprisonment?"
asked frank, after sitting in a despondent attitude for a moment.
""should n't wonder if it was both.
running off with an engine is no joke, you know."
""what did possess me to be such a fool?"
groaned frank, repenting, all too late, of yielding to the temptation which assailed him.
""bear up, old fellow, i'll stand by you; and if the worst comes, i'll call as often as the rules of the prison allow," said gus, consolingly, as he gave his afflicted friend an arm, and they walked away, both feeling that they were marked men from that day forth.
meantime, joe, as soon as he recovered from the shock of seeing the boys actually go off, ran away, as fast as his legs could carry him, to prepare mrs. minot for the loss of her son; for the idea of their coming safely back never occurred to him, his knowledge of engines being limited.
a loud ring at the bell brought mrs. pecq, who was guarding the house, while mrs. minot entertained a parlor full of company.
""frank's run off with no. 11, and he'll be killed sure.
thought i'd come up and tell you," stammered joe, all out of breath and looking wild.
he got no further, for mrs. pecq clapped one hand over his mouth, caught him by the collar with the other, and hustled him into the ante-room before any one else could hear the bad news.
""tell me all about it, and do n't shout.
what's come to the boy?"
she demanded, in a tone that reduced joe to a whisper at once.
""go right back and see what has happened to him, then come and tell me quietly.
i'll wait for you here.
i would n't have his mother startled for the world," said the good soul, when she knew all.
""oh, i dar "s n't!
i opened the switch as they told me to, and bill will half kill me when he knows it!"
cried joe, in a panic, as the awful consequences of his deed rose before him, showing both boys mortally injured and several trains wrecked.
""then take yourself off home and hold your tongue.
i'll watch the door, for i wo n't have any more ridiculous boys tearing in to disturb my lady."
mrs. pecq often called this good neighbor "my lady" when speaking of her, for mrs. minot was a true gentlewoman, and much pleasanter to live with than the titled mistress had been.
joe scudded away as if the constable was after him, and presently frank was seen slowly approaching with an unusually sober face and a pair of very dirty hands.
""thank heaven, he's safe!"
and, softly opening the door, mrs. pecq actually hustled the young master into the ante-room as unceremoniously as she had hustled joe.
""i beg pardon, but the parlor is full of company, and that fool of a joe came roaring in with a cock-and-bull story that gave me quite a turn.
what is it, mr. frank?"
she asked eagerly, seeing that something was amiss.
he told her in a few words, and she was much relieved to find that no harm had been done.
""ah, the danger is to come," said frank, darkly, as he went away to wash his hands and prepare to relate his misdeeds.
it was a very bad quarter of an hour for the poor fellow, who so seldom had any grave faults to confess; but he did it manfully, and his mother was so grateful for the safety of her boy that she found it difficult to be severe enough, and contented herself with forbidding any more visits to the too charming no. 11.
""what do you suppose will be done to me?"
asked frank, on whom the idea of imprisonment had made a deep impression.
""i do n't know, dear, but i shall go over to see mr. burton right after tea.
he will tell us what to do and what to expect.
gus must not suffer for your fault."
""he'll come off clear enough, but joe must take his share, for if he had n't opened that confounded switch, no harm would have been done.
but when i saw the way clear, i actually could n't resist going ahead," said frank, getting excited again at the memory of that blissful moment when he started the engine.
here jack came hurrying in, having heard the news, and refused to believe it from any lips but frank's.
when he could no longer doubt, he was so much impressed with the daring of the deed that he had nothing but admiration for his brother, till a sudden thought made him clap his hands and exclaim exultingly, -- "his runaway beats mine all hollow, and now he ca n't crow over me!
wo n't that be a comfort?
the good boy has got into a scrape.
hooray!"
this was such a droll way of taking it, that they had to laugh; and frank took his humiliation so meekly that jack soon fell to comforting him, instead of crowing over him.
jill thought it a most interesting event; and, when frank and his mother went over to consult mr. burton, she and jack planned out for the dear culprit a dramatic trial which would have convulsed the soberest of judges.
his sentence was ten years" imprisonment, and such heavy fines that the family would have been reduced to beggary but for the sums made by jill's fancy work and jack's success as a champion pedestrian.
they found such comfort and amusement in this sensational programme that they were rather disappointed when frank returned, reporting that a fine would probably be all the penalty exacted, as no harm had been done, and he and gus were such respectable boys.
what would happen to joe, he could not tell, but he thought a good whipping ought to be added to his share.
of course, the affair made a stir in the little world of children; and when frank went to school, feeling that his character for good behavior was forever damaged, he found himself a lion, and was in danger of being spoiled by the admiration of his comrades, who pointed him out with pride as "the fellow who ran off with a steam-engine."
but an interview with judge kemble, a fine of twenty-five dollars, and lectures from all the grown people of his acquaintance, prevented him from regarding his escapade as a feat to boast of.
he discovered, also, how fickle a thing is public favor, for very soon those who had praised began to tease, and it took all his courage, patience, and pride to carry him through the next week or two.
the lads were never tired of alluding to no. 11, giving shrill whistles in his ear, asking if his watch was right, and drawing locomotives on the blackboard whenever they got a chance.
the girls, too, had sly nods and smiles, hints and jokes of a milder sort, which made him color and fume, and once lose his dignity entirely.
molly loo, who dearly loved to torment the big boys, and dared attack even solemn frank, left one of boo's old tin trains on the door-step, directed to "conductor minot," who, i regret to say, could not refrain from kicking it into the street, and slamming the door with a bang that shook the house.
shrieks of laughter from wicked molly and her coadjutor, grif, greeted this explosion of wrath, which did no good, however, for half an hour later the same cars, all in a heap, were on the steps again, with two headless dolls tumbling out of the cab, and the dilapidated engine labelled, "no. 11 after the collision."
no one ever saw that ruin again, and for days frank was utterly unconscious of molly's existence, as propriety forbade his having it out with her as he had with grif.
then annette made peace between them, and the approach of the twenty-second gave the wags something else to think of.
but it was long before frank forgot that costly prank; for he was a thoughtful boy, who honestly wanted to be good; so he remembered this episode humbly, and whenever he felt the approach of temptation he made the strong will master it, saying to himself "down brakes!"
thus saving the precious freight he carried from many of the accidents which befall us when we try to run our trains without orders, and so often wreck ourselves as well as others.
chapter xii.
the twenty-second of february of course, the young ladies and gentlemen had a ball on the evening of that day, but the boys and girls were full of excitement about their "scenes from the life of washington and other brilliant tableaux," as the programme announced.
the bird room was the theatre, being very large, with four doors conveniently placed.
ralph was in his element, putting up a little stage, drilling boys, arranging groups, and uniting in himself carpenter, scene-painter, manager, and gas man.
mrs. minot permitted the house to be turned topsy-turvy, and mrs. pecq flew about, lending a hand everywhere.
jill was costumer, with help from miss delano, who did not care for balls, and kindly took charge of the girls.
jack printed tickets, programmes, and placards of the most imposing sort, and the work went gayly on till all was ready.
when the evening came, the bird room presented a fine appearance.
one end was curtained off with red drapery; and real footlights, with tin shades, gave a truly theatrical air to the little stage.
rows of chairs, filled with mammas and little people, occupied the rest of the space.
the hall and frank's room were full of amused papas, uncles, and old gentlemen whose patriotism brought them out in spite of rheumatism.
there was a great rustling of skirts, fluttering of fans, and much lively chat, till a bell rang and the orchestra struck up.
yes, there really was an orchestra, for ed declared that the national airs must be played, or the whole thing would be a failure.
so he had exerted himself to collect all the musical talent he could find, a horn, a fiddle, and a flute, with drum and fife for the martial scenes.
ed looked more beaming than ever, as he waved his baton and led off with yankee doodle as a safe beginning, for every one knew that.
it was fun to see little johnny cooper bang away on a big drum, and old mr. munson, who had been a fifer all his days, blow till he was as red as a lobster, while every one kept time to the music which put them all in good spirits for the opening scene.
up went the curtain and several trees in tubs appeared, then a stately gentleman in small clothes, cocked hat, gray wig, and an imposing cane, came slowly walking in.
it was gus, who had been unanimously chosen not only for washington but for the father of the hero also, that the family traits of long legs and a somewhat massive nose might be preserved.
""ahem!
my trees are doing finely," observed mr. w., senior, strolling along with his hands behind him, casting satisfied glances at the dwarf orange, oleander, abutilon, and little pine that represented his orchard.
suddenly he starts, pauses, frowns, and, after examining the latter shrub, which displayed several hacks in its stem and a broken limb with six red-velvet cherries hanging on it, he gave a thump with his cane that made the little ones jump, and cried out, -- "can it have been my son?"
he evidently thought it was, for he called, in tones of thunder, -- "george!
george washington, come hither this moment!"
great suspense on the part of the audience, then a general burst of laughter as boo trotted in, a perfect miniature of his honored parent, knee breeches, cocked hat, shoe buckles and all.
he was so fat that the little tails of his coat stuck out in the drollest way, his chubby legs could hardly carry the big buckles, and the rosy face displayed, when he took his hat off with a dutiful bow, was so solemn, the real george could not have looked more anxious when he gave the immortal answer.
""sirrah, did you cut that tree?"
demanded the papa, with another rap of the cane, and such a frown that poor boo looked dismayed, till molly whispered, "put your hand up, dear."
then he remembered his part, and, putting one finger in his mouth, looked down at his square-toed shoes, the image of a shame-stricken boy.
""my son, do not deceive me.
if you have done this deed i shall chastise you, for it is my duty not to spare the rod, lest i spoil the child.
but if you lie about it you disgrace the name of washington forever."
this appeal seemed to convulse george with inward agony, for he squirmed most effectively as he drew from his pocket a toy hatchet, which would not have cut a straw, then looking straight up into the awe-inspiring countenance of his parent, he bravely lisped, -- "papa, i tannot tell a lie.
i did tut it with my little hanchet."
""noble boy -- come to my arms!
i had rather you spoilt all my cherry trees than tell one lie!"
cried the delighted gentleman, catching his son in an embrace so close that the fat legs kicked convulsively, and the little coat-tails waved in the breeze, while cane and hatchet fell with a dramatic bang.
the curtain descended on this affecting tableau; but the audience called out both washingtons, and they came, hand in hand, bowing with the cocked hats pressed to their breasts, the elder smiling blandly, while the younger, still flushed by his exertions, nodded to his friends, asking, with engaging frankness, "was n't it nice?"
the next was a marine piece, for a boat was seen, surrounded by tumultuous waves of blue cambric, and rowed by a party of stalwart men in regimentals, who with difficulty kept their seats, for the boat was only a painted board, and they sat on boxes or stools behind it.
but few marked the rowers, for in their midst, tall, straight, and steadfast as a mast, stood one figure in a cloak, with folded arms, high boots, and, under the turned-up hat, a noble countenance, stern with indomitable courage.
a sword glittered at his side, and a banner waved over him, but his eye was fixed on the distant shore, and he was evidently unconscious of the roaring billows, the blocks of ice, the discouragement of his men, or the danger and death that might await him.
napoleon crossing the alps was not half so sublime, and with one voice the audience cried, "washington crossing the delaware!"
while the band burst forth with, "see, the conquering hero comes!"
all out of tune, but bound to play it or die in the attempt.
it would have been very successful if, all of a sudden, one of the rowers had not "caught a crab" with disastrous consequences.
the oars were not moving, but a veteran, who looked very much like joe, dropped the one he held, and in trying to turn and pummel the black-eyed warrior behind him, he tumbled off his seat, upsetting two other men, and pulling the painted boat upon them as they lay kicking in the cambric deep.
shouts of laughter greeted this mishap, but george washington never stirred.
grasping the banner, he stood firm when all else went down in the general wreck, and the icy waves engulfed his gallant crew, leaving him erect amid a chaos of wildly tossing boots, entangled oars, and red-faced victims.
such god-like dignity could not fail to impress the frivolous crowd of laughers, and the curtain fell amid a round of applause for him alone.
""quite exciting, was n't it?
did n't know gus had so much presence of mind," said mr. burton, well pleased with his boy.
""if we did not know that washington died in his bed, december 14, 1799, i should fear that we'd seen the last of him in that shipwreck," laughed an old gentleman, proud of his memory for dates.
much confusion reigned behind the scenes; ralph was heard scolding, and joe set every one off again by explaining, audibly, that grif tickled him, and he could n't stand it.
a pretty, old-fashioned picture of the "daughters of liberty" followed, for the girls were determined to do honor to the brave and patient women who so nobly bore their part in the struggle, yet are usually forgotten when those days are celebrated.
the damsels were charming in the big caps, flowered gowns, and high-heeled shoes of their great-grandmothers, as they sat about a spider-legged table talking over the tax, and pledging themselves to drink no more tea till it was taken off.
molly was on her feet proposing, "liberty forever, and down with all tyrants," to judge from her flashing eyes as she held her egg-shell cup aloft, while the others lifted theirs to drink the toast, and merry, as hostess, sat with her hand on an antique teapot, labelled "sage," ready to fill again when the patriotic ladies were ready for a second "dish."
this was much applauded, and the curtain went up again, for the proud parents enjoyed seeing their pretty girls in the faded finery of a hundred years ago.
the band played "auld lang syne," as a gentle hint that our fore-mothers should be remembered as well as the fore-fathers.
it was evident that something very martial was to follow, for a great tramping, clashing, and flying about took place behind the scenes while the tea-party was going on.
after some delay, "the surrender of cornwallis" was presented in the most superb manner, as you can believe when i tell you that the stage was actually lined with a glittering array of washington and his generals, lafayette, kosciusko, rochambeau and the rest, all in astonishing uniforms, with swords which were evidently the pride of their lives.
fife and drum struck up a march, and in came cornwallis, much cast down but full of manly resignation, as he surrendered his sword, and stood aside with averted eyes while his army marched past, piling their arms at the hero's feet.
this scene was the delight of the boys, for the rifles of company f had been secured, and at least a dozen soldiers kept filing in and out in british uniform till washington's august legs were hidden by the heaps of arms rattled down before him.
the martial music, the steady tramp, and the patriotic memories awakened, caused this scene to be enthusiastically encored, and the boys would have gone on marching till midnight if ralph had not peremptorily ordered down the curtain and cleared the stage for the next tableau.
this had been artfully slipped in between two brilliant ones, to show that the father of his country had to pay a high price for his glory.
the darkened stage represented what seemed to be a camp in a snow-storm, and a very forlorn camp, too; for on "the cold, cold ground" -lrb- a reckless display of cotton batting -rrb- lay ragged soldiers, sleeping without blankets, their worn-out boots turned up pathetically, and no sign of food or fire to be seen.
a very shabby sentinel, with feet bound in bloody cloths, and his face as pale as chalk could make it, gnawed a dry crust as he kept his watch in the wintry night.
a tent at the back of the stage showed a solitary figure sitting on a log of wood, poring over the map spread upon his knee, by the light of one candle stuck in a bottle.
there could be no doubt who this was, for the buff-and-blue coat, the legs, the nose, the attitude, all betrayed the great george laboring to save his country, in spite of privations, discouragements, and dangers which would have daunted any other man.
""valley forge," said someone, and the room was very still as old and young looked silently at this little picture of a great and noble struggle in one of its dark hours.
the crust, the wounded feet, the rags, the snow, the loneliness, the indomitable courage and endurance of these men touched the hearts of all, for the mimic scene grew real for a moment; and, when a child's voice broke the silence, asking pitifully, "oh, mamma, was it truly as dreadful as that?"
a general outburst answered, as if every one wanted to cheer up the brave fellows and bid them fight on, for victory was surely coming.
in the next scene it did come, and "washington at trenton" was prettily done.
an arch of flowers crossed the stage, with the motto, "the defender of the mothers will be the preserver of the daughters;" and, as the hero with his generals advanced on one side, a troop of girls, in old-fashioned muslin frocks, came to scatter flowers before him, singing the song of long ago: -- "welcome, mighty chief, once more welcome to this grateful shore; now no mercenary foe aims again the fatal blow, -- aims at thee the fatal blow.
""virgins fair and matrons grave, those thy conquering arm did save, build for thee triumphal bowers; strew, ye fair, his way with flowers, -- strew your hero's way with flowers."
and they did, singing with all their hearts as they flung artificial roses and lilies at the feet of the great men, who bowed with benign grace.
jack, who did lafayette with a limp, covered himself with glory by picking up one of the bouquets and pressing it to his heart with all the gallantry of a frenchman; and when washington lifted the smallest of the maids and kissed her, the audience cheered.
could n't help it, you know, it was so pretty and inspiring.
the washington family, after the famous picture, came next, with annette as the serene and sensible martha, in a very becoming cap.
the general was in uniform, there being no time to change, but his attitude was quite correct, and the custis boy and girl displayed the wide sash and ruffled collar with historic fidelity.
the band played "home," and every one agreed that it was "sweet!"
""now i do n't see what more they can have except the death-bed, and that would be rather out of place in this gay company," said the old gentleman to mr. burton, as he mopped his heated face after pounding so heartily he nearly knocked the ferule off his cane.
""no; they gave that up, for my boy would n't wear a night-gown in public.
i ca n't tell secrets, but i think they have got a very clever little finale for the first part -- a pretty compliment to one person and a pleasant surprise to all," answered mr. burton, who was in great spirits, being fond of theatricals and very justly proud of his children, for the little girls had been among the trenton maids, and the mimic general had kissed his own small sister, nelly, very tenderly.
a great deal of interest was felt as to what this surprise was to be, and a general "oh!"
greeted the "minute man," standing motionless upon his pedestal.
it was frank, and ralph had done his best to have the figure as perfect as possible, for the maker of the original had been a good friend to him; and, while the young sculptor was dancing gayly at the ball, this copy of his work was doing him honor among the children.
frank looked it very well, for his firm-set mouth was full of resolution, his eyes shone keen and courageous under the three-cornered hat, and the muscles stood out upon the bare arm that clutched the old gun.
even the buttons on the gaiters seemed to flash defiance, as the sturdy legs took the first step from the furrow toward the bridge where the young farmer became a hero when he "fired the shot heard "round the world."
""that is splendid!"
""as like to the original as flesh can be to bronze."
""how still he stands!"
""he'll fight when the time comes, and die hard, wo n't he?"
""hush!
you make the statue blush!"
these very audible remarks certainly did, for the color rose visibly as the modest lad heard himself praised, though he saw but one face in all the crowd, his mother's, far back, but full of love and pride, as she looked up at her young minute man waiting for the battle which often calls us when we least expect it, and for which she had done her best to make him ready.
if there had been any danger of frank being puffed up by the success of his statue, it was counteracted by irrepressible grif, who, just at the most interesting moment, when all were gazing silently, gave a whistle, followed by a "choo, choo, choo!"
and "all aboard!"
so naturally that no one could mistake the joke, especially as another laughing voice added, "now, then, no. 11!"
which brought down the house and the curtain too.
frank was so angry, it was very difficult to keep him on his perch for the last scene of all.
he submitted, however, rather than spoil the grand finale, hoping that its beauty would efface that ill-timed pleasantry from the public mind.
so, when the agreeable clamor of hands and voices called for a repetition, the minute man reappeared, grimmer than before.
but not alone, for grouped all about his pedestal were washington and his generals, the matrons and maids, with a background of troops shouldering arms, grif and joe doing such rash things with their muskets, that more than one hero received a poke in his august back.
before the full richness of this picture had been taken in, ed gave a rap, and all burst out with "hail columbia," in such an inspiring style that it was impossible for the audience to refrain from joining, which they did, all standing and all singing with a heartiness that made the walls ring.
the fife shrilled, the horn blew sweet and clear, the fiddle was nearly drowned by the energetic boom of the drum, and out into the starry night, through open windows, rolled the song that stirs the coldest heart with patriotic warmth and tunes every voice to music."
"america!"
we must have "america!"
pipe up, ed, this is too good to end without one song more," cried mr. burton, who had been singing like a trumpet; and, hardly waiting to get their breath, off they all went again with the national hymn, singing as they never had sung it before, for somehow the little scenes they had just acted or beheld seemed to show how much this dear america of ours had cost in more than one revolution, how full of courage, energy, and virtue it was in spite of all its faults, and what a privilege, as well as duty, it was for each to do his part toward its safety and its honor in the present, as did those brave men and women in the past.
so the "scenes from the life of washington" were a great success, and, when the songs were over, people were glad of a brief recess while they had raptures, and refreshed themselves with lemonade.
the girls had kept the secret of who the "princess" was to be, and, when the curtain rose, a hum of surprise and pleasure greeted the pretty group.
jill lay asleep in all her splendor, the bonny "prince" just lifting the veil to wake her with a kiss, and all about them the court in its nap of a hundred years.
the "king" and "queen" dozing comfortably on the throne; the maids of honor, like a garland of nodding flowers, about the couch; the little page, unconscious of the blow about to fall, and the fool dreaming, with his mouth wide open.
it was so pretty, people did not tire of looking, till jack's lame leg began to tremble, and he whispered: "drop her or i shall pitch."
down went the curtain; but it rose in a moment, and there was the court after the awakening: the "king" and "queen" looking about them with sleepy dignity, the maids in various attitudes of surprise, the fool grinning from ear to ear, and the "princess" holding out her hand to the "prince," as if glad to welcome the right lover when he came at last.
molly got the laugh this time, for she could not resist giving poor boo the cuff which had been hanging over him so long.
she gave it with unconscious energy, and boo cried "ow!"
so naturally that all the children were delighted and wanted it repeated.
but boo declined, and the scenes which followed were found quite as much to their taste, having been expressly prepared for the little people.
mother goose's reception was really very funny, for ralph was the old lady, and had hired a representation of the immortal bird from a real theatre for this occasion.
there they stood, the dame in her pointed hat, red petticoat, cap, and cane, with the noble fowl, a good deal larger than life, beside her, and grif inside, enjoying himself immensely as he flapped the wings, moved the yellow legs, and waved the long neck about, while unearthly quacks issued from the bill.
that was a great surprise for the children, and they got up in their seats to gaze their fill, many of them firmly believing that they actually beheld the blessed old woman who wrote the nursery songs they loved so well.
then in came, one after another, the best of the characters she has made famous, while a voice behind the scenes sang the proper rhyme as each made their manners to the interesting pair.
""mistress mary," and her "pretty maids all in a row," passed by to their places in the background; "king cole" and his "fiddlers three" made a goodly show; so did the royal couple, who followed the great pie borne before them, with the "four-and-twenty blackbirds" popping their heads out in the most delightful way.
little "bo-peep" led a woolly lamb and wept over its lost tail, for not a sign of one appeared on the poor thing.
""simple simon" followed the pie-man, gloating over his wares with the drollest antics.
the little wife came trundling by in a wheelbarrow and was not upset; neither was the lady with "rings on her fingers and bells on her toes," as she cantered along on a rocking-horse.
""bobby shafto's" yellow hair shone finely as he led in the maid whom he came back from sea to marry.
""miss muffet," bowl in hand, ran away from an immense black spider, which waggled its long legs in a way so life-like that some of the children shook in their little shoes.
the beggars who came to town were out in full force, "rags, tags, and velvet gowns," quite true to life.
""boy blue" rubbed his eyes, with hay sticking in his hair, and tooted on a tin horn as if bound to get the cows out of the corn.
molly, with a long-handled frying-pan, made a capital "queen," in a tucked-up gown, checked apron, and high crown, to good "king arthur," who, very properly, did not appear after stealing the barley-meal, which might be seen in the pan tied up in a pudding, like a cannon-ball, ready to fry.
but tobias, molly's black cat, covered himself with glory by the spirit with which he acted his part in, "sing, sing, what shall i sing?
the cat's run away with the pudding-bag string."
first he was led across the stage on his hind legs, looking very fierce and indignant, with a long tape trailing behind him; and, being set free at the proper moment, he gave one bound over the four-and-twenty blackbirds who happened to be in the way, and dashed off as if an enraged cook had actually been after him, straight downstairs to the coal-bin, where he sat glaring in the dark, till the fun was over.
when all the characters had filed in and stood in two long rows, music struck up and they danced, "all the way to boston," a simple but lively affair, which gave each a chance to show his or her costume as they pranced down the middle and up outside.
such a funny medley as it was, for there went fat "king cole" with the most ragged of the beggar-maids.
""mistress mary," in her pretty blue dress, tripped along with "simple simon" staring about him like a blockhead.
the fine lady left her horse to dance with "bobby shafto" till every bell on her slippers tinkled its tongue out.
""bo-peep" and a jolly fiddler skipped gayly up and down.
""miss muffet" took the big spider for her partner, and made his many legs fly about in the wildest way.
the little wife got out of the wheelbarrow to help "boy blue" along, and molly, with the frying-pan over her shoulder, led off splendidly when it was "grand right and left."
but the old lady and her goose were the best of all, for the dame's shoe-buckles cut the most astonishing pigeon-wings, and to see that mammoth bird waddle down the middle with its wings half open, its long neck bridling, and its yellow legs in the first position as it curtsied to its partner, was a sight to remember, it was so intensely funny.
the merry old gentleman laughed till he cried; mr. burton split his gloves, he applauded so enthusiastically; while the children beat the dust out of the carpet hopping up and down, as they cried: "do it again!"
""we want it all over!"
when the curtain went down at last on the flushed and panting party, mother g -- bowing, with her hat all awry, and the goose doing a double shuffle as if it did not know how to leave off.
but they could not "do it all over again," for it was growing late, and the people felt that they certainly had received their money's worth that evening.
so it all ended merrily, and when the guests departed the boys cleared the room like magic, and the promised supper to the actors was served in handsome style.
jack and jill were at one end, mrs. goose and her bird at the other, and all between was a comical collection of military heroes, fairy characters, and nursery celebrities.
all felt the need of refreshment after their labors, and swept over the table like a flight of locusts, leaving devastation behind.
but they had earned their fun: and much innocent jollity prevailed, while a few lingering papas and mammas watched the revel from afar, and had not the heart to order these noble beings home till even the father of his country declared "that he'd had a perfectly splendid time, but could n't keep his eyes open another minute," and very wisely retired to replace the immortal cocked hat with a night-cap.
chapter xiii.
jack has a mystery "what is the matter?
does your head ache?"
asked jill, one evening in march, observing that jack sat with his head in his hands, an attitude which, with him, meant either pain or perplexity.
""no; but i'm bothered.
i want some money, and i do n't see how i can earn it," he answered, tumbling his hair about, and frowning darkly at the fire.
""how much?"
and jill's ready hand went to the pocket where her little purse lay, for she felt rich with several presents lately made her.
""two seventy-five.
no, thank you, i wo n't borrow."
""what is it for?"
""ca n't tell."
""why, i thought you told me everything."
""sorry, but i ca n't this time.
do n't you worry; i shall think of something."
""could n't your mother help?"
""do n't wish to ask her."
""why!
ca n't she know?"
""nobody can."
""how queer!
is it a scrape, jack?"
asked jill, looking as curious as a magpie.
""it is likely to be, if i ca n't get out of it this week, somehow."
""well, i do n't see how i can help if i'm not to know anything;" and jill seemed rather hurt.
""you can just stop asking questions, and tell me how a fellow can earn some money.
that would help.
i've got one dollar, but i must have some more;" and jack looked worried as he fingered the little gold dollar on his watch-guard.
""oh, do you mean to use that?"
""yes, i do; a man must pay his debts if he sells all he has to do it," said jack sternly.
""dear me; it must be something very serious."
and jill lay quite still for five minutes, thinking over all the ways in which jack ever did earn money, for mrs. minot liked to have her boys work, and paid them in some way for all they did.
""is there any wood to saw?"
she asked presently, being very anxious to help.
""all done."
""paths to shovel?"
""no snow."
""lawn to rake, then?"
""not time for that yet."
""catalogue of books?"
""frank got that job."
""copy those letters for your mother?"
""take me too long.
must have my money friday, if possible."
""i do n't see what we can do, then.
it is too early or too late for everything, and you wo n't borrow."
""not of you.
no, nor of any one else, if i can possibly help it.
i've promised to do this myself, and i will;" and jack wagged his head resolutely.
""could n't you do something with the printing-press?
do me some cards, and then, perhaps, the other girls will want some," said jill, as a forlorn hope.
""just the thing!
what a goose i was not to think of it.
i'll rig the old machine up at once."
and, starting from his seat, jack dived into the big closet, dragged out the little press, and fell to oiling, dusting, and putting it in order, like one relieved of a great anxiety.
""give me the types; i'll sort them and set up my name, so you can begin as soon as you are ready.
you know what a help i was when we did the programmes.
i'm almost sure the girls will want cards, and i know your mother would like some more tags," said jill, briskly rattling the letters into the different compartments, while jack inked the rollers and hunted up his big apron, whistling the while with recovered spirits.
a dozen neat cards were soon printed, and jill insisted on paying six cents for them, as earning was not borrowing.
a few odd tags were found and done for mamma, who immediately ordered four dozen at six cents a dozen, though she was not told why there was such a pressing call for money.
jack's monthly half-dollar had been spent the first week, -- twenty-five cents for a concert, ten paid a fine for keeping a book too long from the library, ten more to have his knife ground, and five in candy, for he dearly loved sweeties, and was under bonds to mamma not to spend more than five cents a month on these unwholesome temptations.
she never asked the boys what they did with their money, but expected them to keep account in the little books she gave them; and, now and then, they showed the neat pages with pardonable pride, though she often laughed at the queer items.
all that evening jack & co. worked busily, for when frank came in he good-naturedly ordered some pale-pink cards for annette, and ran to the store to choose the right shade, and buy some packages for the young printer also.
""what do you suppose he is in such a pucker for?"
whispered jill, as she set up the new name, to frank, who sat close by, with one eye on his book and one on her.
""oh, some notion.
he's a queer chap; but i guess it is n't much of a scrape, or i should know it.
he's so good-natured he's always promising to do things for people, and has too much pluck to give up when he finds he ca n't.
let him alone, and it will all come out soon enough," answered frank, who laughed at his brother, but loved him none the less for the tender heart that often got the better of his young head.
but for once frank was mistaken; the mystery did not come out, and jack worked like a beaver all that week, as orders poured in when jill and annette showed their elegant cards; for, as everybody knows, if one girl has a new thing all the rest must, whether it is a bow on the top of her head, a peculiar sort of pencil, or the latest kind of chewing-gum.
little play did the poor fellow get, for every spare minute was spent at the press, and no invitation could tempt him away, so much in earnest was our honest little franklin about paying his debt.
jill helped all she could, and cheered his labors with her encouragement, remembering how he stayed at home for her.
""it is real good of you to lend a hand, and i'm ever so much obliged," said jack, as the last order was struck off, and the drawer of the type-box held a pile of shining five and ten cent pieces, with two or three quarters.
""i love to; only it would be nicer if i knew what we were working for," she said demurely, as she scattered type for the last time; and seeing that jack was both tired and grateful, hoped to get a hint of the secret.
""i want to tell you, dreadfully; but i ca n't, because i've promised."
""what, never?"
""never!"
and jack looked as firm as a rock.
""then i shall find out, for i have n't promised."
""you ca n't."
""see if i do n't!"
""you are sharp, but you wo n't guess this.
it's a tremendous secret, and nobody will tell it."
""you'll tell it yourself.
you always do."
""i wo n't tell this.
it would be mean."
""wait and see; i can get anything out of you if i try;" and jill laughed, knowing her power well, for jack found it very hard to keep a secret from her.
""do n't try; please do n't!
it would n't be right, and you do n't want to make me do a dishonorable thing for your sake, i know."
jack looked so distressed that jill promised not to make him tell, though she held herself free to find out in other ways, if she could.
thus relieved, jack trudged off to school on friday with the two dollars and seventy-five cents jingling in his pocket, though the dear gold coin had to be sacrificed to make up the sum.
he did his lessons badly that day, was late at recess in the afternoon, and, as soon as school was over, departed in his rubber boots "to take a walk," he said, though the roads were in a bad state with a spring thaw.
nothing was seen of him till after tea-time, when he came limping in, very dirty and tired, but with a reposeful expression, which betrayed that a load was off his mind.
frank was busy about his own affairs and paid little attention to him, but jill was on tenter-hooks to know where he had been, yet dared not ask the question.
""merry's brother wants some cards.
he liked hers so much he wishes to make his lady-love a present.
here's the name;" and jill held up the order from harry grant, who was to be married in the autumn.
""must wait till next week.
i'm too tired to do a thing to-night, and i hate the sight of that old press," answered jack, laying himself down upon the rug as if every joint ached.
""what made you take such a long walk?
you look as tired as if you'd been ten miles," said jill, hoping to discover the length of the trip.
""had to.
four or five miles is n't much, only my leg bothered me;" and jack gave the ailing member a slap, as if he had found it much in his way that day; for, though he had given up the crutches long ago, he rather missed their support sometimes.
then, with a great yawn, he stretched himself out to bask in the blaze, pillowing his head on his arms.
""dear old thing, he looks all used up; i wo n't plague him with talking;" and jill began to sing, as she often did in the twilight.
by the time the first song ended a gentle snore was heard, and jack lay fast asleep, worn out with the busy week and the walk, which had been longer and harder than any one guessed.
jill took up her knitting and worked quietly by firelight, still wondering and guessing what the secret could be; for she had not much to amuse her, and little things were very interesting if connected with her friends.
presently jack rolled over and began to mutter in his sleep, as he often did when too weary for sound slumber.
jill paid no attention till he uttered a name which made her prick up her ears and listen to the broken sentences which followed.
only a few words, but she dropped her work, saying to herself, -- "i do believe he is talking about the secret.
now i shall find out, and he will tell me himself, as i said he would."
much pleased, she leaned and listened, but could make no sense of the confused babble about "heavy boots;" "all right, old fellow;" "jerry's off;" and "the ink is too thick."
the slam of the front door woke jack, and he pulled himself up, declaring that he believed he had been having a nap.
""i wish you'd have another," said jill, greatly disappointed at the loss of the intelligence she seemed to be so near getting.
""floor is too hard for tired bones.
guess i'll go to bed and get rested up for monday.
i've worked like fury this week, so next i'm going in for fun;" and, little dreaming what hard times were in store for him, jack went off to enjoy his warm bath and welcome bed, where he was soon sleeping with the serene look of one whose dreams were happy, whose conscience was at rest.
* * * * * "i have a few words to say to you before you go," said mr. acton, pausing with his hand on the bell, monday afternoon, when the hour came for dismissing school.
the bustle of putting away books and preparing for as rapid a departure as propriety allowed, subsided suddenly, and the boys and girls sat as still as mice, while the hearts of such as had been guilty of any small sins began to beat fast.
""you remember that we had some trouble last winter about keeping the boys away from the saloon, and that a rule was made forbidding any pupil to go to town during recess?"
began mr. acton, who, being a conscientious man as well as an excellent teacher, felt that he was responsible for the children in school hours, and did his best to aid parents in guarding them from the few temptations which beset them in a country town.
a certain attractive little shop, where confectionery, baseballs, stationery, and picture papers were sold, was a favorite loafing place for some of the boys till the rule forbidding it was made, because in the rear of the shop was a beer and billiard saloon.
a wise rule, for the picture papers were not always of the best sort; cigars were to be had; idle fellows hung about there, and some of the lads, who wanted to be thought manly, ventured to pass the green baize door "just to look on."
a murmur answered the teacher's question, and he continued, "you all know that the rule was broken several times, and i told you the next offender would be publicly reprimanded, as private punishments had no effect.
i am sorry to say that the time has come, and the offender is a boy whom i trusted entirely.
it grieves me to do this, but i must keep my promise, and hope the example will have a good effect."
mr. acton paused, as if he found it hard to go on, and the boys looked at one another with inquiring eyes, for their teacher seldom punished, and when he did, it was a very solemn thing.
several of these anxious glances fell upon joe, who was very red and sat whittling a pencil as if he dared not lift his eyes.
""he's the chap.
wo n't he catch it?"
whispered gus to frank, for both owed him a grudge.
""the boy who broke the rule last friday, at afternoon recess, will come to the desk," said mr. acton in his most impressive manner.
if a thunderbolt had fallen through the roof it would hardly have caused a greater surprise than the sight of jack minot walking slowly down the aisle, with a wrathful flash in the eyes he turned on joe as he passed him.
""now, minot, let us have this over as soon as possible, for i do not like it any better than you do, and i am sure there is some mistake.
i'm told you went to the shop on friday.
is it true?"
asked mr. acton very gently, for he liked jack and seldom had to correct him in any way.
""yes, sir;" and jack looked up as if proud to show that he was not afraid to tell the truth as far as he could.
""to buy something?"
""no, sir."
""to meet someone?"
""yes, sir."
""was it jerry shannon?"
no answer, but jack's fists doubled up of themselves as he shot another fiery glance at joe, whose face burned as if it scorched him.
""i am told it was; also that you were seen to go into the saloon with him.
did you?"
and mr. acton looked so sure that it was a mistake that it cost jack a great effort to say, slowly, -- "yes, sir."
quite a thrill pervaded the school at this confession, for jerry was one of the wild fellows the boys all shunned, and to have any dealings with him was considered a very disgraceful thing.
""did you play?"
""no, sir.
i ca n't."
""drink beer?"
""i belong to the lodge;" and jack stood as erect as any little soldier who ever marched under a temperance banner, and fought for the cause none are too young nor too old to help along.
""i was sure of that.
then what took you there, my boy?"
the question was so kindly put that jack forgot himself an instant, and blurted out, -- "i only went to pay him some money, sir."
""ah, how much?"
""two seventy-five," muttered jack, as red as a cherry at not being able to keep a secret better.
""too much for a lad like you to owe such a fellow as jerry.
how came it?"
and mr. acton looked disturbed.
jack opened his lips to speak, but shut them again, and stood looking down with a little quiver about the mouth that showed how much it cost him to be silent.
""does any one beside jerry know of this?"
""one other fellow," after a pause.
""yes, i understand;" and mr. acton's eye glanced at joe with a look that seemed to say, "i wish he'd held his tongue."
a queer smile flitted over jack's face, for joe was not the "other fellow," and knew very little about it, excepting what he had seen when he was sent on an errand by mr. acton on friday.
""i wish you would explain the matter, john, for i am sure it is better than it seems, and it would be very hard to punish you when you do n't deserve it."
""but i do deserve it; i've broken the rule, and i ought to be punished," said jack, as if a good whipping would be easier to bear than this public cross-examination.
""and you ca n't explain, or even say you are sorry or ashamed?"
asked mr. acton, hoping to surprise another fact out of the boy.
""no, sir; i ca n't; i'm not ashamed; i'm not sorry, and i'd do it again to-morrow if i had to," cried jack, losing patience, and looking as if he would not bear much more.
a groan from the boys greeted this bare-faced declaration, and susy quite shivered at the idea of having taken two bites out of the apple of such a hardened desperado.
""think it over till to-morrow, and perhaps you will change your mind.
remember that this is the last week of the month, and reports are given out next friday," said mr. acton, knowing how much the boy prided himself on always having good ones to show his mother.
poor jack turned scarlet and bit his lips to keep them still, for he had forgotten this when he plunged into the affair which was likely to cost him dear.
then the color faded away, the boyish face grew steady, and the honest eyes looked up at his teacher as he said very low, but all heard him, the room was so still, -- "it is n't as bad as it looks, sir, but i ca n't say any more.
no one is to blame but me; and i could n't help breaking the rule, for jerry was going away, i had only that time, and i'd promised to pay up, so i did."
mr. acton believed every word he said, and regretted that they had not been able to have it out privately, but he, too, must keep his promise and punish the offender, whoever he was.
""very well, you will lose your recess for a week, and this month's report will be the first one in which behavior does not get the highest mark.
you may go; and i wish it understood that master minot is not to be troubled with questions till he chooses to set this matter right."
then the bell rang, the children trooped out, mr. acton went off without another word, and jack was left alone to put up his books and hide a few tears that would come because frank turned his eyes away from the imploring look cast upon him as the culprit came down from the platform, a disgraced boy.
elder brothers are apt to be a little hard on younger ones, so it is not surprising that frank, who was an eminently proper boy, was much cut up when jack publicly confessed to dealings with jerry, leaving it to be supposed that the worst half of the story remained untold.
he felt it his duty, therefore, to collar poor jack when he came out, and talk to him all the way home, like a judge bent on getting at the truth by main force.
a kind word would have been very comforting, but the scolding was too much for jack's temper, so he turned dogged and would not say a word, though frank threatened not to speak to him for a week.
at tea-time both boys were very silent, one looking grim, the other excited.
frank stared sternly at his brother across the table, and no amount of marmalade sweetened or softened that reproachful look.
jack defiantly crunched his toast, with occasional slashes at the butter, as if he must vent the pent-up emotions which half distracted him.
of course, their mother saw that something was amiss, but did not allude to it, hoping that the cloud would blow over as so many did if left alone.
but this one did not, and when both refused cake, this sure sign of unusual perturbation made her anxious to know the cause.
as soon as tea was over, jack retired with gloomy dignity to his own room, and frank, casting away the paper he had been pretending to read, burst out with the whole story.
mrs. minot was as much surprised as he, but not angry, because, like most mothers, she was sure that her sons could not do anything very bad.
""i will speak to him; my boy wo n't refuse to give me some explanation," she said, when frank had freed his mind with as much warmth as if jack had broken all the ten commandments.
""he will.
you often call me obstinate, but he is as pig-headed as a mule; joe only knows what he saw, old tell-tale!
and jerry has left town, or i'd have it out of him.
make jack own up, whether he can or not.
little donkey!"
stormed frank, who hated rowdies and could not forgive his brother for being seen with one.
""my dear, all boys do foolish things sometimes, even the wisest and best behaved, so do n't be hard on the poor child.
he has got into trouble, i've no doubt, but it can not be very bad, and he earned the money to pay for his prank, whatever it was."
mrs. minot left the room as she spoke, and frank cooled down as if her words had been a shower-bath, for he remembered his own costly escapade, and how kindly both his mother and jack had stood by him on that trying occasion.
so, feeling rather remorseful, he went off to talk it over with gus, leaving jill in a fever of curiosity, for merry and molly had dropped in on their way home to break the blow to her, and frank declined to discuss it with her, after mildly stating that jack was "a ninny," in his opinion.
""well, i know one thing," said jill confidentially to snow-ball, when they were left alone together, "if every one else is scolding him i wo n't say a word.
it's so mean to crow over people when they are down, and i'm sure he has n't done anything to be ashamed of, though he wo n't tell."
snow-ball seemed to agree to this, for he went and sat down by jack's slippers waiting for him on the hearth, and jill thought that a very touching proof of affectionate fidelity to the little master who ruled them both.
when he came, it was evident that he had found it harder to refuse his mother than all the rest.
but she trusted him in spite of appearances, and that was such a comfort!
for poor jack's heart was very full, and he longed to tell the whole story, but he would not break his promise, and so kept silence bravely.
jill asked no questions, affecting to be anxious for the games they always played together in the evening, but while they played, though the lips were sealed, the bright eyes said as plainly as words, "i trust you," and jack was very grateful.
it was well he had something to cheer him up at home, for he got little peace at school.
he bore the grave looks of mr. acton meekly, took the boys" jokes good-naturedly, and withstood the artful teasing of the girls with patient silence.
but it was very hard for the social, affectionate fellow to bear the general distrust, for he had been such a favorite he felt the change keenly.
but the thing that tried him most was the knowledge that his report would not be what it usually was.
it was always a happy moment when he showed it to his mother, and saw her eye brighten as it fell on the 99 or 100, for she cared more for good behavior than for perfect lessons.
mr. acton once said that frank minot's moral influence in the school was unusual, and jack never forgot her pride and delight as she told them what frank himself had not known till then.
it was jack's ambition to have the same said of him, for he was not much of a scholar, and he had tried hard since he went back to school to get good records in that respect at least.
now here was a dreadful downfall, tardy marks, bad company, broken rules, and something too wrong to tell, apparently.
""well, i deserve a good report, and that's a comfort, though nobody believes it," he said to himself, trying to keep up his spirits, as the slow week went by, and no word from him had cleared up the mystery.
chapter xiv.
and jill finds it out jill worried about it more than he did, for she was a faithful little friend, and it was a great trial to have jack even suspected of doing anything wrong.
school is a child's world while he is there, and its small affairs are very important to him, so jill felt that the one thing to be done was to clear away the cloud about her dear boy, and restore him to public favor.
""ed will be here saturday night and may be he will find out, for jack tells him everything.
i do hate to have him hectored so, for i know he is, though he's too proud to complain," she said, on thursday evening, when frank told her some joke played upon his brother that day.
""i let him alone, but i see that he is n't badgered too much.
that's all i can do.
if ed had only come home last saturday it might have done some good, but now it will be too late; for the reports are given out to-morrow, you know," answered frank, feeling a little jealous of ed's influence over jack, though his own would have been as great if he had been as gentle.
""has jerry come back?"
asked jill, who kept all her questions for frank, because she seldom alluded to the tender subject when with jack.
""no, he's off for the summer.
got a place somewhere.
hope he'll stay there and let bob alone."
""where is bob now?
i do n't hear much about him lately," said jill, who was constantly on the lookout for "the other fellow," since it was not joe.
""oh, he went to captain skinner's the first of march, chores round, and goes to school up there.
captain is strict, and wo n't let bob come to town, except sundays; but he do n't mind it much, for he likes horses, has nice grub, and the hill fellows are good chaps for him to be with.
so he's all right, if he only behaves."
""how far is it to captain skinner's?"
asked jill suddenly, having listened, with her sharp eyes on frank, as he tinkered away at his model, since he was forbidden all other indulgence in his beloved pastime.
""it's four miles to hill district, but the captain lives this side of the school-house.
about three from here, i should say."
""how long would it take a boy to walk up there?"
went on the questioner, with a new idea in her head.
""depends on how much of a walkist he is."
""suppose he was lame and it was sloshy, and he made a call and came back.
how long would that take?"
asked jill impatiently.
""well, in that case, i should say two or three hours.
but it's impossible to tell exactly, unless you know how lame the fellow was, and how long a call he made," said frank, who liked to be accurate.
""jack could n't do it in less, could he?"
""he used to run up that hilly road for a breather, and think nothing of it.
it would be a long job for him now, poor little chap, for his leg often troubles him, though he hates to own it."
jill lay back and laughed, a happy little laugh, as if she was pleased about something, and frank looked over his shoulder to ask questions in his turn.
""what are you laughing at?"
""ca n't tell."
""why do you want to know about hill district?
are you going there?"
""wish i could!
i'd soon have it out of him."
""who?"
""never mind.
please push up my table.
i must write a letter, and i want you to post it for me to-night, and never say a word till i give you leave."
""oh, now you are going to have secrets and be mysterious, and get into a mess, are you?"
and frank looked down at her with a suspicious air, though he was intensely curious to know what she was about.
""go away till i'm done.
you will have to see the outside, but you ca n't know the inside till the answer comes;" and propping herself up, jill wrote the following note, with some hesitation at the beginning and end, for she did not know the gentleman she was addressing, except by sight, and it was rather awkward: -- "robert walker.
""dear sir, i want to ask if jack minot came to see you last friday afternoon.
he got into trouble being seen with jerry shannon.
he paid him some money.
jack wo n't tell, and mr. acton talked to him about it before all the school.
we feel bad, because we think jack did not do wrong.
i do n't know as you have anything to do with it, but i thought i'd ask.
please answer quick.
respectfully yours, "jane pecq" to make sure that her despatch was not tampered with, jill put a great splash of red sealing-wax on it, which gave it a very official look, and much impressed bob when he received it.
""there!
go and post it, and do n't let any one see or know about it," she said, handing it over to frank, who left his work with unusual alacrity to do her errand.
when his eye fell on the address, he laughed, and said in a teasing way, -- "are you and bob such good friends that you correspond?
what will jack say?"
""do n't know, and do n't care!
be good, now, and let's have a little secret as well as other folks.
i'll tell you all about it when he answers," said jill in her most coaxing tone.
""suppose he does n't?"
""then i shall send you up to see him.
i must know something, and i want to do it myself, if i can."
""look here; what are you after?
i do believe you think --" frank got no farther, for jill gave a little scream, and stopped him by crying eagerly, "do n't say it out loud!
i really do believe it may be, and i'm going to find out."
""what made you think of him?"
and frank looked thoughtfully at the letter, as if turning carefully over in his mind the idea that jill's quick wits had jumped at.
""come here and i'll tell you."
holding him by one button, she whispered something in his ear that made him exclaim, with a look at the rug, -- "no!
did he?
i declare i should n't wonder!
it would be just like the dear old blunder-head."
""i never thought of it till you told me where bob was, and then it all sort of burst upon me in one minute!"
cried jill, waving her arms about to express the intellectual explosion which had thrown light upon the mystery, like sky-rockets in a dark night.
""you are as bright as a button.
no time to lose; i'm off;" and off he was, splashing through the mud to post the letter, on the back of which he added, to make the thing sure, "hurry up.
f.m." both felt rather guilty next day, but enjoyed themselves very much nevertheless, and kept chuckling over the mine they were making under jack's unconscious feet.
they hardly expected an answer at noon, as the hill people were not very eager for their mail, but at night jill was sure of a letter, and to her great delight it came.
jack brought it himself, which added to the fun, and while she eagerly read it he sat calmly poring over the latest number of his own private and particular "youth's companion."
bob was not a "complete letter-writer" by any means, and with great labor and much ink had produced the following brief but highly satisfactory epistle.
not knowing how to address his fair correspondent he let it alone, and went at once to the point in the frankest possible way: -- "jack did come up friday.
sorry he got into a mess.
it was real kind of him, and i shall pay him back soon.
jack paid jerry for me and i made him promise not to tell.
jerry said he'd come here and make a row if i did n't cash up.
i was afraid i'd lose the place if he did, for the capt. is awful strict.
if jack do n't tell now, i will.
i ai n't mean.
glad you wrote.
""r.o.w." "hurrah!"
cried jill, waving the letter over her head in great triumph.
""call everybody and read it out," she added, as frank snatched it, and ran for his mother, seeing at a glance that the news was good.
jill was so afraid she should tell before the others came that she burst out singing "pretty bobby shafto" at the top of her voice, to jack's great disgust, for he considered the song very personal, as he was rather fond of "combing down his yellow hair," and jill often plagued him by singing it when he came in with the golden quirls very smooth and nice to hide the scar on his forehead.
in about five minutes the door flew open and in came mamma, making straight for bewildered jack, who thought the family had gone crazy when his parent caught him in her arms, saying tenderly, -- "my good, generous boy!
i knew he was right all the time!"
while frank worked his hand up and down like a pump-handle, exclaiming heartily, -- "you're a trump, sir, and i'm proud of you!"
jill meantime calling out, in wild delight, -- "i told you so!
i told you so!
i did find out; ha, ha, i did!"
""come, i say!
what's the matter?
i'm all right.
do n't squeeze the breath out of me, please," expostulated jack, looking so startled and innocent, as he struggled feebly, that they all laughed, and this plaintive protest caused him to be released.
but the next proceeding did not enlighten him much, for frank kept waving a very inky paper before him and ordering him to read it, while mamma made a charge at jill, as if it was absolutely necessary to hug somebody.
""hullo!"
said jack, when he got the letter into his own hand and read it.
""now who put bob up to this?
nobody had any business to interfere -- but it's mighty good of him, anyway," he added, as the anxious lines in his round face smoothed themselves away, while a smile of relief told how hard it had been for him to keep his word.
""i did!"
cried jill, clapping her hands, and looking so happy that he could not have scolded her if he had wanted to.
""who told you he was in the scrape?"
demanded jack, in a hurry to know all about it now the seal was taken off his own lips.
""you did;" and jill's face twinkled with naughty satisfaction, for this was the best fun of all.
""i did n't!
when?
where?
it's a joke!"
""you did," cried jill, pointing to the rug.
""you went to sleep there after the long walk, and talked in your sleep about "bob" and "all right, old boy," and ever so much gibberish.
i did n't think about it then, but when i heard that bob was up there i thought may be he knew something about it, and last night i wrote and asked him, and that's the answer, and now it is all right, and you are the best boy that ever was, and i'm so glad!"
here jill paused, all out of breath, and frank said, with an approving pat on the head, -- "it wo n't do to have such a sharp young person round if we are going to have secrets.
you'd make a good detective, miss."
""catch me taking naps before people again;" and jack looked rather crestfallen that his own words had set "fine ear" on the track.
""never mind, i did n't mean to tell, though i just ached to do it all the time, so i have n't broken my word.
i'm glad you all know, but you need n't let it get out, for bob is a good fellow, and it might make trouble for him," added jack, anxious lest his gain should be the other's loss.
""i shall tell mr. acton myself, and the captain, also, for i'm not going to have my son suspected of wrong-doing when he has only tried to help a friend, and borne enough for his sake," said mamma, much excited by this discovery of generous fidelity in her boy; though when one came to look at it calmly, one saw that it might have been done in a wiser way.
""now, please, do n't make a fuss about it; that would be most as bad as having every one down on me.
i can stand your praising me, but i wo n't be patted on the head by anybody else;" and jack assumed a manly air, though his face was full of genuine boyish pleasure at being set right in the eyes of those he loved.
""i'll be discreet, dear, but you owe it to yourself, as well as bob, to have the truth known.
both have behaved well, and no harm will come to him, i am sure.
i'll see to that myself," said mrs. minot, in a tone that set jack's mind at rest on that point.
""now do tell all about it," cried jill, who was pining to know the whole story, and felt as if she had earned the right to hear it.
""oh, it was n't much.
we promised ed to stand by bob, so i did as well as i knew how;" and jack seemed to think that was about all there was to say.
""i never saw such a fellow for keeping a promise!
you stick to it through thick and thin, no matter how silly or hard it is.
you remember, mother, last summer, how you told him not to go in a boat and he promised, the day we went on the picnic.
we rode up, but the horse ran off home, so we had to come back by way of the river, all but jack, and he walked every step of five miles because he would n't go near a boat, though mr. burton was there to take care of him.
i call that rather overdoing the matter;" and frank looked as if he thought moderation even in virtue a good thing.
""and i call it a fine sample of entire obedience.
he obeyed orders, and that is what we all must do, without always seeing why, or daring to use our own judgment.
it is a great safeguard to jack, and a very great comfort to me; for i know that if he promises he will keep his word, no matter what it costs him," said mamma warmly, as she tumbled up the quirls with an irrepressible caress, remembering how the boy came wearily in after all the others, without seeming for a moment to think that he could have done anything else.
""like casabianca!"
cried jill, much impressed, for obedience was her hardest trial.
""i think he was a fool to burn up," said frank, bound not to give in.
""i do n't.
it's a splendid piece, and every one likes to speak it, and it was true, and it would n't be in all the books if he was a fool.
grown people know what is good," declared jill, who liked heroic actions, and was always hoping for a chance to distinguish herself in that way.
""you admire "the charge of the light brigade," and glow all over as you thunder it out.
yet they went gallantly to their death rather than disobey orders.
a mistake, perhaps, but it makes us thrill to hear of it; and the same spirit keeps my jack true as steel when once his word is passed, or he thinks it is his duty.
do n't be laughed out of it, my son, for faithfulness in little things fits one for heroism when the great trials come.
one's conscience can hardly be too tender when honor and honesty are concerned."
""you are right, mother, and i am wrong.
i beg your pardon, jack, and you sha'n' t get ahead of me next time."
frank made his mother a little bow, gave his brother a shake of the hand, and nodded to jill, as if anxious to show that he was not too proud to own up when he made a mistake.
""please tell on, jack.
this is very nice, but i do want to know all about the other," said jill, after a short pause.
""let me see.
oh, i saw bob at church, and he looked rather blue; so, after sunday school, i asked what the matter was.
he said jerry bothered him for some money he lent him at different times when they were loafing round together, before we took him up.
he would n't get any wages for some time.
the captain keeps him short on purpose, i guess, and wo n't let him come down town except on sundays.
he did n't want any one to know about it, for fear he'd lose his place.
so i promised i would n't tell.
then i was afraid jerry would go and make a fuss, and bob would run off, or do something desperate, being worried, and i said i'd pay it for him, if i could.
so he went home pretty jolly, and i scratched "round for the money.
got it, too, and was n't i glad?"
jack paused to rub his hands, and frank said, with more than usual respect, "could n't you get hold of jerry in any other place, and out of school time?
that did the mischief, thanks to joe.
i thrashed him, jill -- did i mention it?"
""i could n't get all my money till friday morning, and i knew jerry was off at night.
i looked for him before school, and at noon, but could n't find him, so afternoon recess was my last chance.
i was bound to do it and i did n't mean to break the rule, but jerry was just going into the shop, so i pelted after him, and as it was private business we went to the billiard-room.
i declare i never was so relieved as when i handed over that money, and made him say it was all right, and he would n't go near bob.
he's off, so my mind is easy, and bob will be so grateful i can keep him steady, perhaps.
that will be worth two seventy-five, i think," said jack heartily.
""you should have come to me," began frank.
""and got laughed at -- no, thank you," interrupted jack, recollecting several philanthropic little enterprises which were nipped in the bud for want of co-operation.
""to me, then," said his mother.
""it would have saved so much trouble."
""i thought of it, but bob did n't want the big fellows to know for fear they'd be down on him, so i thought he might not like me to tell grown people.
i do n't mind the fuss now, and bob is as kind as he can be.
wanted to give me his big knife, but i would n't take it.
i'd rather have this," and jack put the letter in his pocket with a slap outside, as if it warmed the cockles of his heart to have it there.
""well, it seems rather like a tempest in a teapot, now it is all over, but i do admire your pluck, little boy, in holding out so well when every one was scolding at you, and you in the right all the time," said frank, glad to praise, now that he honestly could, after his wholesale condemnation.
""that is what pulled me through, i suppose.
i used to think if i had done anything wrong, that i could n't stand the snubbing a day.
i should have told right off, and had it over.
now, i guess i'll have a good report if you do tell mr. acton," said jack, looking at his mother so wistfully, that she resolved to slip away that very evening, and make sure that the thing was done.
""that will make you happier than anything else, wo n't it?"
asked jill, eager to have him rewarded after his trials.
""there's one thing i like better, though i'd be very sorry to lose my report.
it's the fun of telling ed i tried to do as he wanted us to, and seeing how pleased he'll be," added jack, rather bashfully, for the boys laughed at him sometimes for his love of this friend.
""i know he wo n't be any happier about it than someone else, who stood by you all through, and set her bright wits to work till the trouble was all cleared away," said mrs. minot, looking at jill's contented face, as she lay smiling on them all.
jack understood, and, hopping across the room, gave both the thin hands a hearty shake; then, not finding any words quite cordial enough in which to thank this faithful little sister, he stooped down and kissed her gratefully.
chapter xv.
saint lucy saturday was a busy and a happy time to jack, for in the morning mr. acton came to see him, having heard the story overnight, and promised to keep bob's secret while giving jack an acquittal as public as the reprimand had been.
then he asked for the report which jack had bravely received the day before and put away without showing to anybody.
""there is one mistake here which we must rectify," said mr. acton, as he crossed out the low figures under the word "behavior," and put the much-desired 100 there.
""but i did break the rule, sir," said jack, though his face glowed with pleasure, for mamma was looking on.
""i overlook that as i should your breaking into my house if you saw it was on fire.
you ran to save a friend, and i wish i could tell those fellows why you were there.
it would do them good.
i am not going to praise you, john, but i did believe you in spite of appearances, and i am glad to have for a pupil a boy who loves his neighbor better than himself."
then, having shaken hands heartily, mr. acton went away, and jack flew off to have rejoicings with jill, who sat up on her sofa, without knowing it, so eager was she to hear all about the call.
in the afternoon jack drove his mother to the captain's, confiding to her on the way what a hard time he had when he went before, and how nothing but the thought of cheering bob kept him up when he slipped and hurt his knee, and his boot sprung a leak, and the wind came up very cold, and the hill seemed an endless mountain of mud and snow.
mrs. minot had such a gentle way of putting things that she would have won over a much harder man than the strict old captain, who heard the story with interest, and was much pleased with the boys" efforts to keep bob straight.
that young person dodged away into the barn with jack, and only appeared at the last minute to shove a bag of chestnuts into the chaise.
but he got a few kind words that did him good, from mrs. minot and the captain, and from that day felt himself under bonds to behave well if he would keep their confidence.
""i shall give jill the nuts; and i wish i had something she wanted very, very much, for i do think she ought to be rewarded for getting me out of the mess," said jack, as they drove happily home again.
""i hope to have something in a day or two that will delight her very much.
i will say no more now, but keep my little secret and let it be a surprise to all by and by," answered his mother, looking as if she had not much doubt about the matter.
""that will be jolly.
you are welcome to your secret, mamma.
i've had enough of them for one while;" and jack shrugged his broad shoulders as if a burden had been taken off.
in the evening ed came, and jack was quite satisfied when he saw how pleased his friend was at what he had done.
""i never meant you should take so much trouble, only be kind to bob," said ed, who did not know how strong his influence was, nor what a sweet example of quiet well-doing his own life was to all his mates.
""i wished to be really useful; not just to talk about it and do nothing.
that is n't your way, and i want to be like you," answered jack, with such affectionate sincerity that ed could not help believing him, though he modestly declined the compliment by saying, as he began to play softly, "better than i am, i hope.
i do n't amount to much."
""yes, you do!
and if any one says you do n't i'll shake him.
i ca n't tell what it is, only you always look so happy and contented -- sort of sweet and shiny," said jack, as he stroked the smooth brown head, rather at a loss to describe the unusually fresh and sunny expression of ed's face, which was always cheerful, yet had a certain thoughtfulness that made it very attractive to both young and old.
""soap makes him shiny; i never saw such a fellow to wash and brush," put in frank, as he came up with one of the pieces of music he and ed were fond of practising together.
""i do n't mean that!"
said jack indignantly.
""i wash and brush till you call me a dandy, but i do n't have the same look -- it seems to come from the inside, somehow, as if he was always jolly and clean and good in his mind, you know."
""born so," said frank, rumbling away in the bass with a pair of hands that would have been the better for some of the above-mentioned soap, for he did not love to do much in the washing and brushing line.
""i suppose that's it.
well, i like it, and i shall keep on trying, for being loved by every one is about the nicest thing in the world.
is n't it, ed?"
asked jack, with a gentle tweak of the ear as he put a question which he knew would get no answer, for ed was so modest he could not see wherein he differed from other boys, nor believe that the sunshine he saw in other faces was only the reflection from his own.
sunday evening mrs. minot sat by the fire, planning how she should tell some good news she had been saving up all day.
mrs. pecq knew it, and seemed so delighted that she went about smiling as if she did not know what trouble meant, and could not do enough for the family.
she was downstairs now, seeing that the clothes were properly prepared for the wash, so there was no one in the bird room but mamma and the children.
frank was reading up all he could find about some biblical hero mentioned in the day's sermon; jill lay where she had lain for nearly four long months, and though her face was pale and thin with the confinement, there was an expression on it now sweeter even than health.
jack sat on the rug beside her, looking at a white carnation through the magnifying glass, while she was enjoying the perfume of a red one as she talked to him.
""if you look at the white petals you'll see that they sparkle like marble, and go winding a long way down to the middle of the flower where it grows sort of rosy; and in among the small, curly leaves, like fringed curtains, you can see the little green fairy sitting all alone.
your mother showed me that, and i think it is very pretty.
i call it a "fairy," but it is really where the seeds are hidden and the sweet smell comes from."
jill spoke softly lest she should disturb the others, and, as she turned to push up her pillow, she saw mrs. minot looking at her with a smile she did not understand.
""did you speak,'m?"
she asked, smiling back again, without in the least knowing why.
""no, dear.
i was listening and thinking what a pretty little story one could make out of your fairy living alone down there, and only known by her perfume."
""tell it, mamma.
it is time for our story, and that would be a nice one, i guess," said jack, who was as fond of stories as when he sat in his mother's lap and chuckled over the hero of the beanstalk.
""we do n't have fairy tales on sunday, you know," began jill regretfully.
""call it a parable, and have a moral to it, then it will be all right," put in frank, as he shut his big book, having found what he wanted.
""i like stories about saints, and the good and wonderful things they did," said jill, who enjoyed the wise and interesting bits mrs. minot often found for her in grown-up books, for jill had thoughtful times, and asked questions which showed that she was growing fast in mind if not in body.
""this is a true story; but i will disguise it a little, and call it "the miracle of saint lucy,"" began mrs. minot, seeing a way to tell her good news and amuse the children likewise.
frank retired to the easy-chair, that he might sleep if the tale should prove too childish for him.
jill settled herself among her cushions, and jack lay flat upon the rug, with his feet up, so that he could admire his red slippers and rest his knee, which ached.
""once upon a time there was a queen who had two princes."
""was n't there a princess?"
asked jack, interested at once.
""no; and it was a great sorrow to the queen that she had no little daughter, for the sons were growing up, and she was often very lonely.
""like snowdrop's mother," whispered jill.
""now, do n't keep interrupting, children, or we never shall get on," said frank, more anxious to hear about the boys that were than the girl that was not.
""one day, when the princes were out -- ahem!
we'll say hunting -- they found a little damsel lying on the snow, half dead with cold, they thought.
she was the child of a poor woman who lived in the forest -- a wild little thing, always dancing and singing about; as hard to catch as a squirrel, and so fearless she would climb the highest trees, leap broad brooks, or jump off the steep rocks to show her courage.
the boys carried her home to the palace, and the queen was glad to have her.
she had fallen and hurt herself, so she lay in bed week after week, with her mother to take care of her --" "that's you," whispered jack, throwing the white carnation at jill, and she threw back the red one, with her finger on her lips, for the tale was very interesting now.
""she did not suffer much after a time, but she scolded and cried, and could not be resigned, because she was a prisoner.
the queen tried to help her, but she could not do much; the princes were kind, but they had their books and plays, and were away a good deal.
some friends she had came often to see her, but still she beat her wings against the bars, like a wild bird in a cage, and soon her spirits were all gone, and it was sad to see her."
""where was your saint lucy?
i thought it was about her," asked jack, who did not like to have jill's past troubles dwelt upon, since his were not.
""she is coming.
saints are not born -- they are made after many trials and tribulations," answered his mother, looking at the fire as if it helped her to spin her little story.
""well, the poor child used to sing sometimes to while away the long hours -- sad songs mostly, and one among them which the queen taught her was "sweet patience, come."
""this she used to sing a great deal after a while, never dreaming that patience was an angel who could hear and obey.
but it was so; and one night, when the girl had lulled herself to sleep with that song, the angel came.
nobody saw the lovely spirit with tender eyes, and a voice that was like balm.
no one heard the rustle of wings as she hovered over the little bed and touched the lips, the eyes, the hands of the sleeper, and then flew away, leaving three gifts behind.
the girl did not know why, but after that night the songs grew gayer, there seemed to be more sunshine everywhere her eyes looked, and her hands were never tired of helping others in various pretty, useful, or pleasant ways.
slowly the wild bird ceased to beat against the bars, but sat in its cage and made music for all in the palace, till the queen could not do without it, the poor mother cheered up, and the princes called the girl their nightingale."
""was that the miracle?"
asked jack, forgetting all about his slippers, as he watched jill's eyes brighten and the color come up in her white cheeks.
""that was the miracle, and patience can work far greater ones if you will let her."
""and the girl's name was lucy?"
""yes; they did not call her a saint then, but she was trying to be as cheerful as a certain good woman she had heard of, and so the queen had that name for her, though she did not let her know it for a long time."
""that's not bad for a sunday story, but there might have been more about the princes, seems to me," was frank's criticism, as jill lay very still, trying to hide her face behind the carnation, for she had no words to tell how touched and pleased she was to find that her little efforts to be good had been seen, remembered, and now rewarded in this way.
""there is more."
""then the story is n't done?"
cried jack.
""oh dear, no; the most interesting things are to come, if you can wait for them."
""yes, i see, this is the moral part.
now keep still, and let us have the rest," commanded frank, while the others composed themselves for the sequel, suspecting that it was rather nice, because mamma's sober face changed, and her eyes laughed as they looked at the fire.
""the elder prince was very fond of driving dragons, for the people of that country used these fiery monsters as horses."
""and got run away with, did n't he?"
laughed jack, adding, with great interest, "what did the other fellow do?"
""he went about fighting other people's battles, helping the poor, and trying to do good.
but he lacked judgment, so he often got into trouble, and was in such a hurry that he did not always stop to find out the wisest way.
as when he gave away his best coat to a beggar boy, instead of the old one which he intended to give."
""i say, that is n't fair, mother!
neither of them was new, and the boy needed the best more than i did, and i wore the old one all winter, did n't i?"
asked jack, who had rather exulted over frank, and was now taken down himself.
""yes, you did, my dear; and it was not an easy thing for my dandiprat to do.
now listen, and i'll tell you how they both learned to be wiser.
the elder prince soon found that the big dragons were too much for him, and set about training his own little one, who now and then ran away with him.
its name was will, a good servant, but a bad master; so he learned to control it, and in time this gave him great power over himself, and fitted him to be a king over others."
""thank you, mother; i'll remember my part of the moral.
now give jack his," said frank, who liked the dragon episode, as he had been wrestling with his own of late, and found it hard to manage.
""he had a fine example before him in a friend, and he followed it more reasonably till he grew able to use wisely one of the best and noblest gifts of god -- benevolence."
""now tell about the girl.
was there more to that part of the story?"
asked jack, well pleased with his moral, as it took ed in likewise.
""that is the best of all, but it seems as if i never should get to it.
after patience made lucy sweet and cheerful, she began to have a curious power over those about her, and to work little miracles herself, though she did not know it.
the queen learned to love her so dearly she could not let her go; she cheered up all her friends when they came with their small troubles; the princes found bright eyes, willing hands, and a kind heart always at their service, and felt, without quite knowing why, that it was good for them to have a gentle little creature to care for; so they softened their rough manners, loud voices, and careless ways, for her sake, and when it was proposed to take her away to her own home they could not give her up, but said she must stay longer, did n't they?"
""i'd like to see them saying anything else," said frank, while jack sat up to demand fiercely, -- "who talks about taking jill away?"
""lucy's mother thought she ought to go, and said so, but the queen told her how much good it did them all to have her there, and begged the dear woman to let her little cottage and come and be housekeeper in the palace, for the queen was getting lazy, and liked to sit and read, and talk and sew with lucy, better than to look after things."
""and she said she would?"
cried jill, clasping her hands in her anxiety, for she had learned to love her cage now.
""yes."
mrs. minot had no time to say more, for one of the red slippers flew up in the air, and jack had to clap both hands over his mouth to suppress the "hurrah!"
that nearly escaped.
frank said, "that's good!"
and nodded with his most cordial smile at jill who pulled herself up with cheeks now as rosy as the red carnation, and a little catch in her breath as she said to herself, -- "it's too lovely to be true."
""that's a first-rate end to a very good story," began jack, with grave decision, as he put on his slipper and sat up to pat jill's hand, wishing it was not quite so like a little claw.
""that's not the end;" and mamma's eyes laughed more than ever as three astonished faces turned to her, and three voices cried out, -- "still more?"
""the very best of all.
you must know that, while lucy was busy for others, she was not forgotten, and when she was expecting to lie on her bed through the summer, plans were being made for all sorts of pleasant changes.
first of all, she was to have a nice little brace to support the back which was growing better every day; then, as the warm weather came on, she was to go out, or lie on the piazza; and by and by, when school was done, she was to go with the queen and the princes for a month or two down to the sea-side, where fresh air and salt water were to build her up in the most delightful way.
there, now!
is n't that the best ending of all?"
and mamma paused to read her answer in the bright faces of two of the listeners, for jill hid hers in the pillow, and lay quite still, as if it was too much for her.
""that will be regularly splendid!
i'll row you all about -- boating is so much easier than riding, and i like it on salt water," said frank, going to sit on the arm of the sofa, quite excited by the charms of the new plan.
""and i'll teach you to swim, and roll you over the beach, and get sea-weed and shells, and no end of nice things, and we'll all come home as strong as lions," added jack, scrambling up as if about to set off at once.
""the doctor says you have been doing finely of late, and the brace will come to-morrow, and the first really mild day you are to have a breath of fresh air.
wo n't that be good?"
asked mrs. minot, hoping her story had not been too interesting.
""is she crying?"
said jack, much concerned as he patted the pillow in his most soothing way, while frank lifted one curl after another to see what was hidden underneath.
not tears, for two eyes sparkled behind the fingers, then the hands came down like clouds from before the sun, and jill's face shone out so bright and happy it did one's heart good to see it.
""i'm not crying," she said with a laugh which was fuller of blithe music than any song she sung.
""but it was so splendid, it sort of took my breath away for a minute.
i thought i was n't any better, and never should be, and i made up my mind i would n't ask, it would be so hard for any one to tell me so.
now i see why the doctor made me stand up, and told me to get my baskets ready to go a-maying.
i thought he was in fun; did he really mean i could go?"
asked jill, expecting too much, for a word of encouragement made her as hopeful as she had been despondent before.
""no, dear, not so soon as that.
it will be months, probably, before you can walk and run, as you used to; but they will soon pass.
you need n't mind about may-day; it is always too cold for flowers, and you will find more here among your own plants, than on the hills, to fill your baskets," answered mrs. minot, hastening to suggest something pleasant to beguile the time of probation.
""i can wait.
months are not years, and if i'm truly getting well, everything will seem beautiful and easy to me," said jill, laying herself down again, with the patient look she had learned to wear, and gathering up the scattered carnations to enjoy their spicy breath, as if the fairies hidden there had taught her some of their sweet secrets.
""dear little girl, it has been a long, hard trial for you, but it is coming to an end, and i think you will find that it has not been time wasted, i do n't want you to be a saint quite yet, but i am sure a gentler jill will rise up from that sofa than the one who lay down there in december."
""how could i help growing better, when you were so good to me?"
cried jill, putting up both arms, as mrs. minot went to take frank's place, and he retired to the fire, there to stand surveying the scene with calm approval.
""you have done quite as much for us; so we are even.
i proved that to your mother, and she is going to let the little house and take care of the big one for me, while i borrow you to keep me happy and make the boys gentle and kind.
that is the bargain, and we get the best of it," said mrs. minot, looking well pleased, while jack added, "that's so!"
and frank observed with an air of conviction, "we could n't get on without jill, possibly."
""can i do all that?
i did n't know i was of any use.
i only tried to be good and grateful, for there did n't seem to be anything else i could do," said jill, wondering why they were all so fond of her.
""no real trying is ever in vain.
it is like the spring rain, and flowers are sure to follow in good time.
the three gifts patience gave saint lucy were courage, cheerfulness, and love, and with these one can work the sweetest miracles in the world, as you see," and mrs. minot pointed to the pretty room and its happy inmates.
""am i really the least bit like that good lucinda?
i tried to be, but i did n't think i was," asked jill softly.
""you are very like her in all ways but one.
she did not get well, and you will."
a short answer, but it satisfied jill to her heart's core, and that night, when she lay in bed, she thought to herself: "how curious it is that i've been a sort of missionary without knowing it!
they all love and thank me, and wo n't let me go, so i suppose i must have done something, but i do n't know what, except trying to be good and pleasant."
that was the secret, and jill found it out just when it was most grateful as a reward for past efforts, most helpful as an encouragement toward the constant well-doing which can make even a little girl a joy and comfort to all who know and love her.
chapter xvi.
up at merry's "now fly round, child, and get your sweeping done up smart and early."
""yes, mother."
""i shall want you to help me about the baking, by and by."
""yes, mother."
""roxy is cleaning the cellar-closets, so you'll have to get the vegetables ready for dinner.
father wants a boiled dish, and i shall be so busy i ca n't see to it."
""yes, mother."
a cheerful voice gave the three answers, but it cost merry an effort to keep it so, for she had certain little plans of her own which made the work before her unusually distasteful.
saturday always was a trying day, for, though she liked to see rooms in order, she hated to sweep, as no speck escaped mrs. grant's eye, and only the good old-fashioned broom, wielded by a pair of strong arms, was allowed.
baking was another trial: she loved good bread and delicate pastry, but did not enjoy burning her face over a hot stove, daubing her hands with dough, or spending hours rolling out cookies for the boys; while a "boiled dinner" was her especial horror, as it was not elegant, and the washing of vegetables was a job she always shirked when she could.
however, having made up her mind to do her work without complaint, she ran upstairs to put on her dust-cap, trying to look as if sweeping was the joy of her life.
""it is such a lovely day, i did want to rake my garden, and have a walk with molly, and finish my book so i can get another," she said with a sigh, as she leaned out of the open window for a breath of the unusually mild air.
down in the ten-acre lot the boys were carting and spreading loam; out in the barn her father was getting his plows ready; over the hill rose the smoke of the distant factory, and the river that turned the wheels was gliding through the meadows, where soon the blackbirds would be singing.
old bess pawed the ground, eager to be off; the gray hens were scratching busily all about the yard; even the green things in the garden were pushing through the brown earth, softened by april rains, and there was a shimmer of sunshine over the wide landscape that made every familiar object beautiful with hints of spring, and the activity it brings.
something made the old nursery hymn come into merry's head, and humming to herself, "in works of labor or of skill i would be busy too," she tied on her cap, shouldered her broom, and fell to work so energetically that she soon swept her way through the chambers, down the front stairs to the parlor door, leaving freshness and order behind her as she went.
she always groaned when she entered that apartment, and got out of it again as soon as possible, for it was, like most country parlors, a prim and chilly place, with little beauty and no comfort.
black horse-hair furniture, very slippery and hard, stood against the wall; the table had its gift books, albums, worsted mat and ugly lamp; the mantel-piece its china vases, pink shells, and clock that never went; the gay carpet was kept distressingly bright by closed shutters six days out of the seven, and a general air of go-to-meeting solemnity pervaded the room.
merry longed to make it pretty and pleasant, but her mother would allow of no change there, so the girl gave up her dreams of rugs and hangings, fine pictures and tasteful ornaments, and dutifully aired, dusted, and shut up this awful apartment once a week, privately resolving that, if she ever had a parlor of her own, it should not be as dismal as a tomb.
the dining-room was a very different place, for here merry had been allowed to do as she liked, yet so gradual had been the change, that she would have found it difficult to tell how it came about.
it seemed to begin with the flowers, for her father kept his word about the "posy pots," and got enough to make quite a little conservatory in the bay-window, which was sufficiently large for three rows all round, and hanging-baskets overhead.
being discouraged by her first failure, merry gave up trying to have things nice everywhere, and contented herself with making that one nook so pretty that the boys called it her "bower."
even busy mrs. grant owned that plants were not so messy as she expected, and the farmer was never tired of watching "little daughter" as she sat at work there, with her low chair and table full of books.
the lamp helped, also, for merry set up her own, and kept it so well trimmed that it burned clear and bright, shining on the green arch of ivy overhead, and on the nasturtium vines framing the old glass, and peeping at their gay little faces, and at the pretty young girl, so pleasantly that first her father came to read his paper by it, then her mother slipped in to rest on the lounge in the corner, and finally the boys hovered about the door as if the "settin" - room" had grown more attractive than the kitchen.
but the open fire did more than anything else to win and hold them all, as it seldom fails to do when the black demon of an airtight stove is banished from the hearth.
after the room was cleaned till it shone, merry begged to have the brass andirons put in, and offered to keep them as bright as gold if her mother would consent.
so the great logs were kindled, and the flames went dancing up the chimney as if glad to be set free from their prison.
it changed the whole room like magic, and no one could resist the desire to enjoy its cheery comfort.
the farmer's three-cornered leathern chair soon stood on one side, and mother's rocker on the other, as they toasted their feet and dozed or chatted in the pleasant warmth.
the boys" slippers were always ready on the hearth; and when the big boots were once off, they naturally settled down about the table, where the tall lamp, with its pretty shade of pressed autumn leaves, burned brightly, and the books and papers lay ready to their hands instead of being tucked out of sight in the closet.
they were beginning to see that "merry's notions" had some sense in them, since they were made comfortable, and good-naturedly took some pains to please her in various ways.
tom brushed his hair and washed his hands nicely before he came to table.
dick tried to lower his boisterous laughter, and harry never smoked in the sitting-room.
even roxy expressed her pleasure in seeing "things kind of spruced up," and merry's gentle treatment of the hard-working drudge won her heart entirely.
the girl was thinking of these changes as she watered her flowers, dusted the furniture, and laid the fire ready for kindling; and, when all was done, she stood a minute to enjoy the pleasant room, full of spring sunshine, fresh air, and exquisite order.
it seemed to give her heart for more distasteful labors, and she fell to work at the pies as cheerfully as if she liked it.
mrs. grant was flying about the kitchen, getting the loaves of brown and white bread ready for the big oven.
roxy's voice came up from the cellar singing "bounding billows," with a swashing and scrubbing accompaniment which suggested that she was actually enjoying a "life on the ocean wave."
merry, in her neat cap and apron, stood smiling over her work as she deftly rolled and clipped, filled and covered, finding a certain sort of pleasure in doing it well, and adding interest to it by crimping the crust, making pretty devices with strips of paste and star-shaped prickings of the fork.
""good-will giveth skill," says the proverb, and even particular mrs. grant was satisfied when she paused to examine the pastry with her experienced eye.
""you are a handy child and a credit to your bringing up, though i do say it.
those are as pretty pies as i'd wish to eat, if they bake well, and there's no reason why they should n't."
""may i make some tarts or rabbits of these bits?
the boys like them, and i enjoy modelling this sort of thing," said merry, who was trying to mould a bird, as she had seen ralph do with clay to amuse jill while the bust was going on.
""no, dear; there's no time for knick-knacks to-day.
the beets ought to be on this minute.
run and get'em, and be sure you scrape the carrots well."
poor merry put away the delicate task she was just beginning to like, and taking a pan went down cellar, wishing vegetables could be grown without earth, for she hated to put her hands in dirty water.
a word of praise to roxy made that grateful scrubber leave her work to poke about in the root-cellar, choosing "sech as was pretty much of a muchness, else they would n't bile even;" so merry was spared that part of the job, and went up to scrape and wash without complaint, since it was for father.
she was repaid at noon by the relish with which he enjoyed his dinner, for merry tried to make even a boiled dish pretty by arranging the beets, carrots, turnips, and potatoes in contrasting colors, with the beef hidden under the cabbage leaves.
""now, i'll rest and read for an hour, then i'll rake my garden, or run down town to see molly and get some seeds," she thought to herself, as she put away the spoons and glasses, which she liked to wash, that they might always be clear and bright.
""if you've done all your own mending, there's a heap of socks to be looked over.
then i'll show you about darning the tablecloths.
i do hate to have a stitch of work left over till monday," said mrs. grant, who never took naps, and prided herself on sitting down to her needle at 3 p.m. every day.
""yes, mother;" and merry went slowly upstairs, feeling that a part of saturday ought to be a holiday after books and work all the week.
as she braided up her hair, her eye fell upon the reflection of her own face in the glass.
not a happy nor a pretty one just then, and merry was so unaccustomed to seeing any other, that involuntarily the frown smoothed itself out, the eyes lost their weary look, the drooping lips curved into a smile, and, leaning her elbows on the bureau, she shook her head at herself, saying, half aloud, as she glanced at ivanhoe lying near, -- "you need n't look so cross and ugly just because you ca n't have what you want.
sweeping, baking, and darning are not so bad as being plagued with lovers and carried off and burnt at the stake, so i wo n't envy poor rebecca her jewels and curls and romantic times, but make the best of my own."
then she laughed, and the bright face came back into the mirror, looking like an old friend, and merry went on dressing with care, for she took pleasure in her own little charms, and felt a sense of comfort in knowing that she could always have one pretty thing to look at if she kept her own face serene and sweet.
it certainly looked so as it bent over the pile of big socks half an hour later, and brightened with each that was laid aside.
her mother saw it, and, guessing why such wistful glances went from clock to window, kindly shortened the task of table-cloth darning by doing a good bit herself, before putting it into merry's hands.
she was a good and loving mother in spite of her strict ways, and knew that it was better for her romantic daughter to be learning all the housewifery lessons she could teach her, than to be reading novels, writing verses, or philandering about with her head full of girlish fancies, quite innocent in themselves, but not the stuff to live on.
so she wisely taught the hands that preferred to pick flowers, trim up rooms and mould birds, to work well with needle, broom, and rolling-pin; put a receipt-book before the eyes that loved to laugh and weep over tender tales, and kept the young head and heart safe and happy with wholesome duties, useful studies, and such harmless pleasures as girls should love, instead of letting them waste their freshness in vague longings, idle dreams, and frivolous pastimes.
but it was often hard to thwart the docile child, and lately she had seemed to be growing up so fast that her mother began to feel a new sort of tenderness for this sweet daughter, who was almost ready to take upon herself the cares, as well as triumphs and delights, of maidenhood.
something in the droop of the brown head, and the quick motion of the busy hand with a little burn on it, made it difficult for mrs. grant to keep merry at work that day, and her eye watched the clock almost as impatiently as the girl's, for she liked to see the young face brighten when the hour of release came.
""what next?"
asked merry, as the last stitch was set, and she stifled a sigh on hearing the clock strike four, for the sun was getting low, and the lovely afternoon going fast.
""one more job, if you are not too tired for it.
i want the receipt for diet drink miss dawes promised me; would you like to run down and get it for me, dear?"
""yes, mother!"
and that answer was as blithe as a robin's chirp, for that was just where merry wanted to go.
away went thimble and scissors, and in five minutes away went merry, skipping down the hill without a care in the world, for a happy heart sat singing within, and everything seemed full of beauty.
she had a capital time with molly, called on jill, did her shopping in the village, and had just turned to walk up the hill, when ralph evans came tramping along behind her, looking so pleased and proud about something that she could not help asking what it was, for they were great friends, and merry thought that to be an artist was the most glorious career a man could choose.
""i know you've got some good news," she said, looking up at him as he touched his hat and fell into step with her, seeming more contented than before.
""i have, and was just coming up to tell you, for i was sure you would be glad.
it is only a hope, a chance, but it is so splendid i feel as if i must shout and dance, or fly over a fence or two, to let off steam."
""do tell me, quick; have you got an order?"
asked merry, full of interest at once, for artistic vicissitudes were very romantic, and she liked to hear about them.
""i may go abroad in the autumn."
""oh, how lovely!"
""is n't it?
david german is going to spend a year in rome, to finish a statue, and wants me to go along.
grandma is willing, as cousin maria wants her for a long visit, so everything looks promising and i really think i may go."
""wo n't it cost a great deal?"
asked merry, who, in spite of her little elegancies, had a good deal of her thrifty mother's common sense.
""yes; and i've got to earn it.
but i can -- i know i can, for i've saved some, and i shall work like ten beavers all summer.
i wo n't borrow if i can help it, but i know someone who would lend me five hundred if i wanted it;" and ralph looked as eager and secure as if the earning of twice that sum was a mere trifle when all the longing of his life was put into his daily tasks.
""i wish i had it to give you.
it must be so splendid to feel that you can do great things if you only have the chance.
and to travel, and see all the lovely pictures and statues, and people and places in italy.
how happy you must be!"
and merry's eyes had the wistful look they always wore when she dreamed dreams of the world she loved to live in.
""i am -- so happy that i'm afraid it never will happen.
if i do go, i'll write and tell you all about the fine sights, and how i get on.
would you like me to?"
asked ralph, beginning enthusiastically and ending rather bashfully, for he admired merry very much, and was not quite sure how this proposal would be received.
""indeed i should!
i'd feel so grand to have letters from paris and rome, and you'd have so much to tell it would be almost as good as going myself," she said, looking off into the daffodil sky, as they paused a minute on the hill-top to get breath, for both had walked as fast as they talked.
""and will you answer the letters?"
asked ralph, watching the innocent face, which looked unusually kind and beautiful to him in that soft light.
""why, yes; i'd love to, only i shall not have anything interesting to say.
what can i write about?"
and merry smiled as she thought how dull her letters would sound after the exciting details his would doubtless give.
""write about yourself, and all the rest of the people i know.
grandma will be gone, and i shall want to hear how you get on."
ralph looked very anxious indeed to hear, and merry promised she would tell all about the other people, adding, as she turned from the evening peace and loveliness to the house, whence came the clatter of milk-pans and the smell of cooking, -- "i never should have anything very nice to tell about myself, for i do n't do interesting things as you do, and you would n't care to hear about school, and sewing, and messing round at home."
merry gave a disdainful little sniff at the savory perfume of ham which saluted them, and paused with her hand on the gate, as if she found it pleasanter out there than in the house.
ralph seemed to agree with her, for, leaning on the gate, he lingered to say, with real sympathy in his tone and something else in his face, "yes, i should; so you write and tell me all about it.
i did n't know you had any worries, for you always seemed like one of the happiest people in the world, with so many to pet and care for you, and plenty of money, and nothing very hard or hateful to do.
you'd think you were well off if you knew as much about poverty and work and never getting what you want, as i do."
""you bear your worries so well that nobody knows you have them.
i ought not to complain, and i wo n't, for i do have all i need.
i'm so glad you are going to get what you want at last;" and merry held out her hand to say good-night, with so much pleasure in her face that ralph could not make up his mind to go just yet.
""i shall have to scratch round in a lively way before i do get it, for david says a fellow ca n't live on less than four or five hundred a year, even living as poor artists have to, in garrets and on crusts.
i do n't mind as long as grandma is all right.
she is away to-night, or i should not be here," he added, as if some excuse was necessary.
merry needed no hint, for her tender heart was touched by the vision of her friend in a garret, and she suddenly rejoiced that there was ham and eggs for supper, so that he might be well fed once, at least, before he went away to feed on artistic crusts.
""being here, come in and spend the evening.
the boys will like to hear the news, and so will father.
do, now."
it was impossible to refuse the invitation he had been longing for, and in they went to the great delight of roxy, who instantly retired to the pantry, smiling significantly, and brought out the most elaborate pie in honor of the occasion.
merry touched up the table, and put a little vase of flowers in the middle to redeem the vulgarity of doughnuts.
of course the boys upset it, but as there was company nothing was said, and ralph devoured his supper with the appetite of a hungry boy, while watching merry eat bread and cream out of an old-fashioned silver porringer, and thinking it the sweetest sight he ever beheld.
then the young people gathered about the table, full of the new plans, and the elders listened as they rested after the week's work.
a pleasant evening, for they all liked ralph, but as the parents watched merry sitting among the great lads like a little queen among her subjects, half unconscious as yet of the power in her hands, they nodded to one another, and then shook their heads as if they said, -- "i'm afraid the time is coming, mother."
""no danger as long as she do n't know it, father."
at nine the boys went off to the barn, the farmer to wind up the eight-day clock, and the housewife to see how the baked beans and indian pudding for to-morrow were getting on in the oven.
ralph took up his hat to go, saying as he looked at the shade on the tall student lamp, -- "what a good light that gives!
i can see it as i go home every night, and it burns up here like a beacon.
i always look for it, and it hardly ever fails to be burning.
sort of cheers up the way, you know, when i'm tired or low in my mind."
""then i'm very glad i got it.
i liked the shape, but the boys laughed at it as they did at my bulrushes in a ginger-jar over there.
i'd been reading about "household art," and i thought i'd try a little," answered merry, laughing at her own whims.
""you've got a better sort of household art, i think, for you make people happy and places pretty, without fussing over it.
this room is ever so much improved every time i come, though i hardly see what it is except the flowers," said ralph, looking from the girl to the tall calla that bent its white cup above her as if to pour its dew upon her head.
""is n't that lovely?
i tried to draw it -- the shape was so graceful i wanted to keep it.
but i could n't.
is n't it a pity such beautiful things wo n't last forever?"
and merry looked regretfully at the half-faded one that grew beside the fresh blossom.
""i can keep it for you.
it would look well in plaster.
may i?"
asked ralph.
""thank you, i should like that very much.
take the real one as a model -- please do; there are more coming, and this will brighten up your room for a day or two."
as she spoke, merry cut the stem, and, adding two or three of the great green leaves, put the handsome flower in his hand with so much good-will that he felt as if he had received a very precious gift.
then he said good-night so gratefully that merry's hand quite tingled with the grasp of his, and went away, often looking backward through the darkness to where the light burned brightly on the hill-top -- the beacon kindled by an unconscious hero for a young leander swimming gallantly against wind and tide toward the goal of his ambition.
chapter xvii.
down at molly's "now, my dears, i've something very curious to tell you, so listen quietly and then i'll give you your dinners," said molly, addressing the nine cats who came trooping after her as she went into the shed-chamber with a bowl of milk and a plate of scraps in her hands.
she had taught them to behave well at meals, so, though their eyes glared and their tails quivered with impatience, they obeyed; and when she put the food on a high shelf and retired to the big basket, the four old cats sat demurely down before her, while the five kits scrambled after her and tumbled into her lap, as if hoping to hasten the desired feast by their innocent gambols.
granny, tobias, mortification, and molasses were the elders.
granny, a gray old puss, was the mother and grandmother of all the rest.
tobias was her eldest son, and mortification his brother, so named because he had lost his tail, which affliction depressed his spirits and cast a blight over his young life.
molasses was a yellow cat, the mamma of four of the kits, the fifth being granny's latest darling.
toddlekins, the little aunt, was the image of her mother, and very sedate even at that early age; miss muffet, so called from her dread of spiders, was a timid black and white kit; beauty, a pretty maltese, with a serene little face and pink nose; ragbag, a funny thing, every color that a cat could be; and scamp, who well deserved his name, for he was the plague of miss bat's life, and molly's especial pet.
he was now perched on her shoulder, and, as she talked, kept peeping into her face or biting her ear in the most impertinent way, while the others sprawled in her lap or promenaded round the basket rim.
""my friends, something very remarkable has happened: miss bat is cleaning house!"
and, having made this announcement, molly leaned back to see how the cats received it, for she insisted that they understood all she said to them.
tobias stared, mortification lay down as if it was too much for him, molasses beat her tail on the floor as if whipping a dusty carpet, and granny began to purr approvingly.
the giddy kits paid no attention, as they did not know what house-cleaning meant, happy little dears!
""i thought you'd like it, granny, for you are a decent cat, and know what is proper," continued molly, leaning down to stroke the old puss, who blinked affectionately at her.
""i ca n't imagine what put it into miss bat's head.
i never said a word, and gave up groaning over the clutter, as i could n't mend it.
i just took care of boo and myself, and left her to be as untidy as she pleased, and she is a regular old --" here scamp put his paw on her lips because he saw them moving, but it seemed as if it was to check the disrespectful word just coming out.
""well, i wo n't call names; but what shall i do when i see everything in confusion, and she wo n't let me clear up?"
asked molly, looking round at scamp, who promptly put the little paw on her eyelid, as if the roll of the blue ball underneath amused him.
""shut my eyes to it, you mean?
i do all i can, but it is hard, when i wish to be nice, and do try; do n't i?"
asked molly.
but scamp was ready for her, and began to comb her hair with both paws as he stood on his hind legs to work so busily that molly laughed and pulled him down, saying, as she cuddled the sly kit.
""you sharp little thing!
i know my hair is not neat now, for i've been chasing boo round the garden to wash him for school.
then miss bat threw the parlor carpet out of the window, and i was so surprised i had to run and tell you.
now, what had we better do about it?"
the cats all winked at her, but no one had any advice to offer, except tobias, who walked to the shelf, and, looking up, uttered a deep, suggestive yowl, which said as plainly as words, "dinner first and discussion afterward."
""very well, do n't scramble," said molly, getting up to feed her pets.
first the kits, who rushed at the bowl and thrust their heads in, lapping as if for a wager; then the cats, who each went to one of the four piles of scraps laid round at intervals and placidly ate their meat; while molly retired to the basket, to ponder over the phenomena taking place in the house.
she could not imagine what had started the old lady.
it was not the example of her neighbors, who had beaten carpets and scrubbed paint every spring for years without exciting her to any greater exertion than cleaning a few windows and having a man to clear away the rubbish displayed when the snow melted.
molly never guessed that her own efforts were at the bottom of the change, or knew that a few words not meant for her ear had shamed miss bat into action.
coming home from prayer-meeting one dark night, she trotted along behind two old ladies who were gossiping in loud voices, as one was rather deaf, and miss bat was both pleased and troubled to hear herself unduly praised.
""i always said sister dawes meant well; but she's getting into years, and the care of two children is a good deal for her, with her cooking and her rheumatiz.
i do n't deny she did neglect'em for a spell, but she does well by'em now, and i would n't wish to see better-appearing children."
""you've no idee how improved molly is.
she came in to see my girls, and brought her sewing-work, shirts for the boy, and done it as neat and capable as you'd wish to see.
she always was a smart child, but dreadful careless," said the other old lady, evidently much impressed by the change in harum-scarum molly loo.
""being over to mis minot's so much has been good for her, and up to mis grant's.
girls catch neat ways as quick as they do untidy ones, and them wild little tykes often turn out smart women."
""sister dawes has done well by them children, and i hope mr. bemis sees it.
he ought to give her something comfortable to live on when she ca n't do for him any longer.
he can well afford it."
""i have n't a doubt he will.
he's a lavish man when he starts to do a thing, but dreadful unobserving, else he'd have seen to matters long ago.
them children was town-talk last fall, and i used to feel as if it was my bounden duty to speak to miss dawes.
but i never did, fearing i might speak too plain, and hurt her feelings."
""you've spoken plain enough now, and i'm beholden to you, though you'll never know it," said miss bat to herself, as she slipped into her own gate, while the gossips trudged on quite unconscious of the listener behind them.
miss bat was a worthy old soul in the main, only, like so many of us, she needed rousing up to her duty.
she had got the rousing now, and it did her good, for she could not bear to be praised when she had not deserved it.
she had watched molly's efforts with lazy interest, and when the girl gave up meddling with her affairs, as she called the housekeeping, miss bat ceased to oppose her, and let her scrub boo, mend clothes, and brush her hair as much as she liked.
so molly had worked along without any help from her, running in to mrs. pecq for advice, to merry for comfort, or mrs. minot for the higher kind of help one often needs so much.
now miss bat found that she was getting the credit and the praise belonging to other people, and it stirred her up to try and deserve a part at least.
""molly do n't want any help about her work or the boy: it's too late for that; but if this house do n't get a spring cleaning that will make it shine, my name ai n't bathsheba dawes," said the old lady, as she put away her bonnet that night, and laid energetic plans for a grand revolution, inspired thereto not only by shame, but by the hint that "mr. bemis was a lavish man," as no one knew better than she.
molly's amazement next day at seeing carpets fly out of window, ancient cobwebs come down, and long-undisturbed closets routed out to the great dismay of moths and mice, has been already confided to the cats, and as she sat there watching them lap and gnaw, she said to herself, -- "i do n't understand it, but as she never says much to me about my affairs, i wo n't take any notice till she gets through, then i'll admire everything all i can.
it is so pleasant to be praised after you've been trying hard."
she might well say that, for she got very little herself, and her trials had been many, her efforts not always successful, and her reward seemed a long way off.
poor boo could have sympathized with her, for he had suffered much persecution from his small schoolmates when he appeared with large gray patches on the little brown trousers, where he had worn them out coasting down those too fascinating steps.
as he could not see the patches himself, he fancied them invisible, and came home much afflicted by the jeers of his friends.
then molly tried to make him a new pair out of a sack of her own; but she cut both sides for the same leg, so one was wrong side out.
fondly hoping no one would observe it, she sewed bright buttons wherever they could be put, and sent confiding boo away in a pair of blue trousers, which were absurdly hunchy behind and buttony before.
he came home heart-broken and muddy, having been accidentally tipped into a mud-puddle by two bad boys who felt that such tailoring was an insult to mankind.
that roused molly's spirit, and she begged her father to take the boy and have him properly fitted out, as he was old enough now to be well-dressed, and she would n't have him tormented.
his attention being called to the trousers, mr. bemis had a good laugh over them, and then got boo a suit which caused him to be the admired of all observers, and to feel as proud as a little peacock.
cheered by this success, molly undertook a set of small shirts, and stitched away bravely, though her own summer clothes were in a sad state, and for the first time in her life she cared about what she should wear.
""i must ask merry, and may be father will let me go with her and her mother when they do their shopping, instead of leaving it to miss bat, who dresses me like an old woman.
merry knows what is pretty and becoming: i do n't," thought molly, meditating in the bushel basket, with her eyes on her snuff-colored gown and the dark purple bow at the end of the long braid muffet had been playing with.
molly was beginning to see that even so small a matter as the choice of colors made a difference in one's appearance, and to wonder why merry always took such pains to have a blue tie for the gray dress, a rosy one for the brown, and gloves that matched her bonnet ribbons.
merry never wore a locket outside her sack, a gay bow in her hair and soiled cuffs, a smart hat and the braid worn off her skirts.
she was exquisitely neat and simple, yet always looked well-dressed and pretty; for her love of beauty taught her what all girls should learn as soon as they begin to care for appearances -- that neatness and simplicity are their best ornaments, that good habits are better than fine clothes, and the most elegant manners are the kindest.
all these thoughts were dancing through molly's head, and when she left her cats, after a general romp in which even decorous granny allowed her family to play leap-frog over her respectable back, she had made up her mind not to have yellow ribbons on her summer hat if she got a pink muslin as she had planned, but to finish off boo's last shirt before she went shopping with merry.
it rained that evening, and mr. bemis had a headache, so he threw himself down upon the lounge after tea for a nap, with his silk handkerchief spread over his face.
he did get a nap, and when he waked he lay for a time drowsily listening to the patter of the rain, and another sound which was even more soothing.
putting back a corner of the handkerchief to learn what it was, he saw molly sitting by the fire with boo in her lap, rocking and humming as she warmed his little bare feet, having learned to guard against croup by attending to the damp shoes and socks before going to bed.
boo lay with his round face turned up to hers, stroking her cheek while the sleepy blue eyes blinked lovingly at her as she sang her lullaby with a motherly patience sweet to see.
they made a pretty little picture, and mr. bemis looked at it with pleasure, having a leisure moment in which to discover, as all parents do sooner or later, that his children were growing up.
""molly is getting to be quite a woman, and very like her mother," thought papa, wiping the eye that peeped, for he had been fond of the pretty wife who died when boo was born.
""sad loss to them, poor things!
but miss bat seems to have done well by them.
molly is much improved, and the boy looks finely.
she's a good soul, after all;" and mr. bemis began to think he had been hasty when he half made up his mind to get a new housekeeper, feeling that burnt steak, weak coffee, and ragged wristbands were sure signs that miss bat's days of usefulness were over.
molly was singing the lullaby her mother used to sing to her, and her father listened to it silently till boo was carried away too sleepy for anything but bed.
when she came back she sat down to her work, fancying her father still asleep.
she had a crimson bow at her throat and one on the newly braided hair, her cuffs were clean, and a white apron hid the shabbiness of the old dress.
she looked like a thrifty little housewife as she sat with her basket beside her full of neat white rolls, her spools set forth, and a new pair of scissors shining on the table.
there was a sort of charm in watching the busy needle flash to and fro, the anxious pucker of the forehead as she looked to see if the stitches were even, and the expression of intense relief upon her face as she surveyed the finished button-hole with girlish satisfaction.
her father was wide awake and looking at her, thinking, as he did so, -- "really the old lady has worked well to change my tomboy into that nice little girl: i wonder how she did it."
then he gave a yawn, pulled off the handkerchief, and said aloud, "what are you making, molly?"
for it struck him that sewing was a new amusement.
""shirts for boo, sir.
four, and this is the last," she answered, with pardonable pride, as she held it up and nodded toward the pile in her basket.
""is n't that a new notion?
i thought miss bat did the sewing," said mr. bemis, as he smiled at the funny little garment, it looked so like boo himself.
""no, sir; only yours.
i do mine and boo's.
at least, i'm learning how, and mrs. pecq says i get on nicely," answered molly, threading her needle and making a knot in her most capable way.
""i suppose it is time you did learn, for you are getting to be a great girl, and all women should know how to make and mend.
you must take a stitch for me now and then: miss bat's eyes are not what they were, i find;" and mr. bemis looked at his frayed wristband, as if he particularly felt the need of a stitch just then.
""i'd love to, and i guess i could.
i can mend gloves; merry taught me, so i'd better begin on them, if you have any," said molly, much pleased at being able to do anything for her father, and still more so at being asked.
""there's something to start with;" and he threw her a pair, with nearly every finger ripped.
molly shook her head over them, but got out her gray silk and fell to work, glad to show how well she could sew.
""what are you smiling about?"
asked her father, after a little pause, for his head felt better, and it amused him to question molly.
""i was thinking about my summer clothes.
i must get them before long, and i'd like to go with mrs. grant and learn how to shop, if you are willing."
""i thought miss bat did that for you."
""she always has, but she gets ugly, cheap things that i do n't like.
i think i am old enough to choose myself, if there is someone to tell me about prices and the goodness of the stuff.
merry does; and she is only a few months older than i am."
""how old are you, child?"
asked her father, feeling as if he had lost his reckoning.
""fifteen in august;" and molly looked very proud of the fact.
""so you are!
bless my heart, how the time goes!
well, get what you please; if i'm to have a young lady here, i'd like to have her prettily dressed.
it wo n't offend miss bat, will it?"
molly's eyes sparkled, but she gave a little shrug as she answered, "she wo n't care.
she never troubles herself about me if i let her alone.
""hey?
what?
not trouble herself?
if she does n't, who does?"
and mr. bemis sat up as if this discovery was more surprising than the other.
""i take care of myself and boo, and she looks after you.
the house goes any way."
""i should think so!
i nearly broke my neck over the parlor sofa in the hall to-night.
what is it there for?"
molly laughed.
""that's the joke, sir, miss bat is cleaning house, and i'm sure it needs cleaning, for it is years since it was properly done.
i thought you might have told her to."
""i've said nothing.
do n't like house-cleaning well enough to suggest it.
i did think the hall was rather dirty when i dropped my coat and took it up covered with lint.
is she going to upset the whole place?"
asked mr. bemis, looking alarmed at the prospect.
""i hope so, for i really am ashamed when people come, to have them see the dust and cobwebs, and old carpets and dirty windows," said molly, with a sigh, though she never had cared a bit till lately.
""why do n't you dust round a little, then?
no time to spare from the books and play?"
""i tried, father, but miss bat did n't like it, and it was too hard for me alone.
if things were once in nice order, i think i could keep them so; for i do want to be neat, and i'm learning as fast as i can."
""it is high time someone took hold, if matters are left as you say.
i've just been thinking what a clever woman miss bat was, to make such a tidy little girl out of what i used to hear called the greatest tomboy in town, and wondering what i could give the old lady.
now i find you are the one to be thanked, and it is a very pleasant surprise to me."
""give her the present, please; i'm satisfied, if you like what i've done.
it is n't much, and i did n't know as you would ever observe any difference.
but i did try, and now i guess i'm really getting on," said molly, sewing away with a bright color in her cheeks, for she, too, found it a pleasant surprise to be praised after many failures and few successes.
""you certainly are, my dear.
i'll wait till the house-cleaning is over, and then, if we are all alive, i'll see about miss bat's reward.
meantime, you go with mrs. grant and get whatever you and the boy need, and send the bills to me;" and mr. bemis lighted a cigar, as if that matter was settled.
""oh, thank you, sir!
that will be splendid.
merry always has pretty things, and i know you will like me when i get fixed," said molly, smoothing down her apron, with a little air.
""seems to me you look very well as you are.
is n't that a pretty enough frock?"
asked mr. bemis, quite unconscious that his own unusual interest in his daughter's affairs made her look so bright and winsome.
""this?
why, father, i've worn it all winter, and it's frightfully ugly, and almost in rags.
i asked you for a new one a month ago, and you said you'd "see about it"; but you did n't, so i patched this up as well as i could;" and molly showed her elbows, feeling that such masculine blindness as this deserved a mild reproof.
""too bad!
well, go and get half a dozen pretty muslin and gingham things, and be as gay as a butterfly, to make up for it," laughed her father, really touched by the patches and molly's resignation to the unreliable "i'll see about it," which he recognized as a household word.
molly clapped her hands, old gloves and all, exclaiming, with girlish delight, "how nice it will seem to have a plenty of new, neat dresses all at once, and be like other girls!
miss bat always talks about economy, and has no more taste than a -- caterpillar."
molly meant to say "cat," but remembering her pets, spared them the insult.
""i think i can afford to dress my girl as well as grant does his.
get a new hat and coat, child, and any little notions you fancy.
miss bat's economy is n't the sort i like;" and mr. bemis looked at his wristbands again, as if he could sympathize with molly's elbows.
""at this rate, i shall have more clothes than i know what to do with, after being a rag-bag," thought the girl, in great glee, as she bravely stitched away at the worst glove, while her father smoked silently for a while, feeling that several little matters had escaped his eye which he really ought to "see about."
presently he went to his desk, but not to bury himself in business papers, as usual, for, after rummaging in several drawers, he took out a small bunch of keys, and sat looking at them with an expression only seen on his face when he looked up at the portrait of a dark-eyed woman hanging in his room.
he was a very busy man, but he had a tender place in his heart for his children; and when a look, a few words, a moment's reflection, called his attention to the fact that his little girl was growing up, he found both pride and pleasure in the thought that this young daughter was trying to fill her mother's place, and be a comfort to him, if he would let her.
""molly, my dear, here is something for you," he said; and when she stood beside him, added, as he put the keys into her hand, keeping both in his own for a minute, -- "those are the keys to your mother's things.
i always meant you to have them, when you were old enough to use or care for them.
i think you'll fancy this better than any other present, for you are a good child, and very like her."
something seemed to get into his throat there, and molly put her arm round his neck, saying, with a little choke in her own voice, "thank you, father, i'd rather have this than anything else in the world, and i'll try to be more like her every day, for your sake."
he kissed her, then said, as he began to stir his papers about, "i must write some letters.
run off to bed, child.
good-night, my dear, good-night."
seeing that he wanted to be alone, molly slipped away, feeling that she had received a very precious gift; for she remembered the dear, dead mother, and had often longed to possess the relics laid away in the one room where order reigned and miss bat had no power to meddle.
as she slowly undressed, she was not thinking of the pretty new gowns in which she was to be "as gay as a butterfly," but of the half-worn garments waiting for her hands to unfold with a tender touch; and when she fell asleep, with the keys under her pillow and her arms round boo, a few happy tears on her cheeks seemed to show that, in trying to do the duty which lay nearest her, she had earned a very sweet reward.
so the little missionaries succeeded better in their second attempt than in their first; for, though still very far from being perfect girls, each was slowly learning, in her own way, one of the three lessons all are the better for knowing -- that cheerfulness can change misfortune into love and friends; that in ordering one's self aright one helps others to do the same; and that the power of finding beauty in the humblest things makes home happy and life lovely.
chapter xviii.
may baskets spring was late that year, but to jill it seemed the loveliest she had ever known, for hope was growing green and strong in her own little heart, and all the world looked beautiful.
with the help of the brace she could sit up for a short time every day, and when the air was mild enough she was warmly wrapped and allowed to look out at the open window into the garden, where the gold and purple crocuses were coming bravely up, and the snowdrops nodded their delicate heads as if calling to her, -- "good day, little sister, come out and play with us, for winter is over and spring is here."
""i wish i could!"
thought jill, as the soft wind kissed a tinge of color into her pale cheeks.
""never mind, they have been shut up in a darker place than i for months, and had no fun at all; i wo n't fret, but think about july and the seashore while i work."
the job now in hand was may baskets, for it was the custom of the children to hang them on the doors of their friends the night before may-day; and the girls had agreed to supply baskets if the boys would hunt for flowers, much the harder task of the two.
jill had more leisure as well as taste and skill than the other girls, so she amused herself with making a goodly store of pretty baskets of all shapes, sizes, and colors, quite confident that they would be filled, though not a flower had shown its head except a few hardy dandelions, and here and there a small cluster of saxifrage.
the violets would not open their blue eyes till the sunshine was warmer, the columbines refused to dance with the boisterous east wind, the ferns kept themselves rolled up in their brown flannel jackets, and little hepatica, with many another spring beauty, hid away in the woods, afraid to venture out, in spite of the eager welcome awaiting them.
but the birds had come, punctual as ever, and the bluejays were screaming in the orchard, robins were perking up their heads and tails as they went house-hunting, purple finches in their little red hoods were feasting on the spruce buds, and the faithful chip birds chirped gayly on the grapevine trellis where they had lived all winter, warming their little gray breasts against the southern side of the house when the sun shone, and hiding under the evergreen boughs when the snow fell.
""that tree is a sort of bird's hotel," said jill, looking out at the tall spruce before her window, every spray now tipped with a soft green.
""they all go there to sleep and eat, and it has room for every one.
it is green when other trees die, the wind ca n't break it, and the snow only makes it look prettier.
it sings to me, and nods as if it knew i loved it."
""we might call it "the holly tree inn," as some of the cheap eating-houses for poor people are called in the city, as my holly bush grows at its foot for a sign.
you can be the landlady, and feed your feathery customers every day, till the hard times are over," said mrs. minot, glad to see the child's enjoyment of the outer world from which she had been shut so long.
jill liked the fancy, and gladly strewed crumbs on the window ledge for the chippies, who came confidingly to eat almost from her hand.
she threw out grain for the handsome jays, the jaunty robins, and the neighbors" doves, who came with soft flight to trip about on their pink feet, arching their shining necks as they cooed and pecked.
carrots and cabbage-leaves also flew out of the window for the marauding gray rabbit, last of all jack's half-dozen, who led him a weary life of it because they would not stay in the bunny-house, but undermined the garden with their burrows, ate the neighbors" plants, and refused to be caught till all but one ran away, to jack's great relief.
this old fellow camped out for the winter, and seemed to get on very well among the cats and the hens, who shared their stores with him, and he might be seen at all hours of the day and night scampering about the place, or kicking up his heels by moonlight, for he was a desperate poacher.
jill took great delight in her pretty pensioners, who soon learned to love "the holly tree inn," and to feel that the bird room held a caged comrade; for, when it was too cold or wet to open the windows, the doves came and tapped at the pane, the chippies sat on the ledge in plump little bunches as if she were their sunshine, the jays called her in their shrill voices to ring the dinner-bell, and the robins tilted on the spruce boughs where lunch was always to be had.
the first of may came on sunday, so all the celebrating must be done on saturday, which happily proved fair, though too chilly for muslin gowns, paper garlands, and picnics on damp grass.
being a holiday, the boys decided to devote the morning to ball and the afternoon to the flower hunt, while the girls finished the baskets; and in the evening our particular seven were to meet at the minots to fill them, ready for the closing frolic of hanging on door-handles, ringing bells, and running away.
""now i must do my maying, for there will be no more sunshine, and i want to pick my flowers before it is dark.
come, mammy, you go too," said jill, as the last sunbeams shone in at the western window where her hyacinths stood that no fostering ray might be lost.
it was rather pathetic to see the once merry girl who used to be the life of the wood-parties now carefully lifting herself from the couch, and, leaning on her mother's strong arm, slowly take the half-dozen steps that made up her little expedition.
but she was happy, and stood smiling out at old bun skipping down the walk, the gold-edged clouds that drew apart so that a sunbeam might give her a good-night kiss as she gathered her long-cherished daisies, primroses, and hyacinths to fill the pretty basket in her hand.
""who is it for, my dearie?"
asked her mother, standing behind her as a prop, while the thin fingers did their work so willingly that not a flower was left.
""for my lady, of course.
who else would i give my posies to, when i love them so well?"
answered jill, who thought no name too fine for their best friend.
""i fancied it would be for master jack," said her mother, wishing the excursion to be a cheerful one.
""i've another for him, but she must have the prettiest.
he is going to hang it for me, and ring and run away, and she wo n't know who it's from till she sees this.
she will remember it, for i've been turning and tending it ever so long, to make it bloom to-day.
is n't it a beauty?"
and jill held up her finest hyacinth, which seemed to ring its pale pink bells as if glad to carry its sweet message from a grateful little heart.
""indeed it is; and you are right to give your best to her.
come away now, you must not stand any longer.
come and rest while i fetch a dish to put the flowers in till you want them;" and mrs. pecq turned her round with her small maying safely done.
""i did n't think i'd ever be able to do even so much, and here i am walking and sitting up, and going to drive some day.
is n't it nice that i'm not to be a poor lucinda after all?"
and jill drew a long sigh of relief that six months instead of twenty years would probably be the end of her captivity.
""yes, thank heaven!
i do n't think i could have borne that;" and the mother took jill in her arms as if she were a baby, holding her close for a minute, and laying her down with a tender kiss that made the arms cling about her neck as her little girl returned it heartily, for all sorts of new, sweet feelings seemed to be budding in both, born of great joy and thankfulness.
then mrs. pecq hurried away to see about tea for the hungry boys, and jill watched the pleasant twilight deepen as she lay singing to herself one of the songs her friend taught her because it fitted her so well.
""a little bird i am, shut from the fields of air, and in my cage i sit and sing to him who placed me there: well pleased a prisoner to be, because, my god, it pleases thee!
""naught have i else to do; i sing the whole day long; and he whom most i love to please doth listen to my song, he caught and bound my wandering wing, but still he bends to hear me sing."
""now we are ready for you, so bring on your flowers," said molly to the boys, as she and merry added their store of baskets to the gay show jill had set forth on the long table ready for the evening's work.
""they would n't let me see one, but i guess they have had good luck, they look so jolly," answered jill, looking at gus, frank, and jack, who stood laughing, each with a large basket in his hands.
""fair to middling.
just look in and see;" with which cheerful remark gus tipped up his basket and displayed a few bits of green at the bottom.
""i did better.
now, do n't all scream at once over these beauties;" and frank shook out some evergreen sprigs, half a dozen saxifrages, and two or three forlorn violets with hardly any stems.
""i do n't brag, but here's the best of all the three," chuckled jack, producing a bunch of feathery carrot-tops, with a few half-shut dandelions trying to look brave and gay.
""oh, boys, is that all?"
""what shall we do?"
""we've only a few house-flowers, and all those baskets to fill," cried the girls, in despair; for merry's contribution had been small, and molly had only a handful of artificial flowers "to fill up," she said.
""it is n't our fault: it is the late spring.
we ca n't make flowers, can we?"
asked frank, in a tone of calm resignation.
""could n't you buy some, then?"
said molly, smoothing her crumpled morning-glories, with a sigh.
""who ever heard of a fellow having any money left the last day of the month?"
demanded gus, severely.
""or girls either.
i spent all mine in ribbon and paper for my baskets, and now they are of no use.
it's a shame!"
lamented jill, while merry began to thin out her full baskets to fill the empty ones.
""hold on!"
cried frank, relenting.
""now, jack, make their minds easy before they begin to weep and wail."
""left the box outside.
you tell while i go for it;" and jack bolted, as if afraid the young ladies might be too demonstrative when the tale was told.
""tell away," said frank, modestly passing the story along to gus, who made short work of it.
""we rampaged all over the country, and got only that small mess of greens.
knew you'd be disgusted, and sat down to see what we could do.
then jack piped up, and said he'd show us a place where we could get a plenty.
"come on," said we, and after leading us a nice tramp, he brought us out at morse's greenhouse.
so we got a few on tick, as we had but four cents among us, and there you are.
pretty clever of the little chap, was n't it?"
a chorus of delight greeted jack as he popped his head in, was promptly seized by his elders and walked up to the table, where the box was opened, displaying gay posies enough to fill most of the baskets if distributed with great economy and much green.
""you are the dearest boy that ever was!"
began jill, with her nose luxuriously buried in the box, though the flowers were more remarkable for color than perfume.
""no, i'm not; there's a much dearer one coming upstairs now, and he's got something that will make you howl for joy," said jack, ignoring his own prowess as ed came in with a bigger box, looking as if he had done nothing but go a maying all his days.
""do n't believe it!"
cried jill, hugging her own treasure jealously.
""it's only another joke.
i wo n't look," said molly, still struggling to make her cambric roses bloom again.
""i know what it is!
oh, how sweet!"
added merry, sniffing, as ed set the box before her, saying pleasantly, -- "you shall see first, because you had faith."
up went the cover, and a whiff of the freshest fragrance regaled the seven eager noses bent to inhale it, as a general murmur of pleasure greeted the nest of great, rosy mayflowers that lay before them.
""the dear things, how lovely they are!"
and merry looked as if greeting her cousins, so blooming and sweet was her own face.
molly pushed her dingy garlands away, ashamed of such poor attempts beside these perfect works of nature, and jill stretched out her hand involuntarily, as she said, forgetting her exotics, "give me just one to smell of, it is so woodsy and delicious."
""here you are, plenty for all.
real pilgrim fathers, right from plymouth.
one of our fellows lives there, and i told him to bring me a good lot; so he did, and you can do what you like with them," explained ed, passing round bunches and shaking the rest in a mossy pile upon the table.
""ed always gets ahead of us in doing the right thing at the right time.
hope you've got some first-class baskets ready for him," said gus, refreshing the washingtonian nose with a pink blossom or two.
""not much danger of his being forgotten," answered molly; and every one laughed, for ed was much beloved by all the girls, and his door-steps always bloomed like a flower-bed on may eve.
""now we must fly round and fill up.
come, boys, sort out the green and hand us the flowers as we want them.
then we must direct them, and, by the time that is done, you can go and leave them," said jill, setting all to work.
""ed must choose his baskets first.
these are ours; but any of those you can have;" and molly pointed to a detachment of gay baskets, set apart from those already partly filled.
ed chose a blue one, and merry filled it with the rosiest may-flowers, knowing that it was to hang on mabel's door-handle.
the others did the same, and the pretty work went on, with much fun, till all were filled, and ready for the names or notes.
""let us have poetry, as we ca n't get wild flowers.
that will be rather fine," proposed jill, who liked jingles.
all had had some practice at the game parties, and pencils went briskly for a few minutes, while silence reigned, as the poets racked their brains for rhymes, and stared at the blooming array before them for inspiration.
""oh, dear!
i ca n't find a word to rhyme to "geranium,"" sighed molly, pulling her braid, as if to pump the well of her fancy dry.
""cranium," said frank, who was getting on bravely with "annette" and "violet."
""that is elegant!"
and molly scribbled away in great glee, for her poems were always funny ones.
""how do you spell anemoly -- the wild flower, i mean?"
asked jill, who was trying to compose a very appropriate piece for her best basket, and found it easier to feel love and gratitude than to put them into verse.
""anemone; do spell it properly, or you'll get laughed at," answered gus, wildly struggling to make his lines express great ardor, without being "too spoony," as he expressed it.
""no, i should n't.
this person never laughs at other persons" mistakes, as some persons do," replied jill, with dignity.
jack was desperately chewing his pencil, for he could not get on at all; but ed had evidently prepared his poem, for his paper was half full already, and merry was smiling as she wrote a friendly line or two for ralph's basket, as she feared he would be forgotten, and knew he loved kindness even more than he did beauty.
""now let's read them," proposed molly, who loved to laugh even at herself.
the boys politely declined, and scrambled their notes into the chosen baskets in great haste; but the girls were less bashful.
jill was invited to begin, and gave her little piece, with the pink hyacinth basket before her, to illustrate her poem.
""to my lady "there are no flowers in the fields, no green leaves on the tree, no columbines, no violets, no sweet anemone.
so i have gathered from my pots all that i have to fill the basket that i hang to-night, with heaps of love from jill."
""that's perfectly sweet!
mine is n't; but i meant it to be funny," said molly, as if there could be any doubt about the following ditty: -- "dear grif, here is a whiff of beautiful spring flowers; the big red rose is for your nose, as toward the sky it towers.
""oh, do not frown upon this crown of green pinks and blue geranium but think of me when this you see, and put it on your cranium."
""o molly, you will never hear the last of that if grif gets it," said jill, as the applause subsided, for the boys pronounced it "tip-top."
""do n't care, he gets the worst of it any way, for there is a pin in that rose, and if he goes to smell the mayflowers underneath he will find a thorn to pay for the tack he put in my rubber boot.
i know he will play me some joke to-night, and i mean to be first if i can," answered molly, settling the artificial wreath round the orange-colored canoe which held her effusion.
asked sally, all impatience to begin.
""shut the lower draught of the stove, so that the oven may heat.
then wash your hands and get out the flour, sugar, salt, butter, and cinnamon.
see if the pie-board is clean, and pare your apple ready to put in."
daisy got things together with as little noise and spilling as could be expected, from so young a cook.
""i really do n't know how to measure for such tiny pies; i must guess at it, and if these do n't succeed, we must try again," said mrs. jo, looking rather perplexed, and very much amused with the small concern before her.
""take that little pan full of flour, put in a pinch of salt, and then rub in as much butter as will go on that plate.
always remember to put your dry things together first, and then the wet.
it mixes better so."
""i know how; i saw asia do it.
do n't i butter the pie plates too?
she did, the first thing," said daisy, whisking the flour about at a great rate.
""quite right!
i do believe you have a gift for cooking, you take to it so cleverly," said aunt jo, approvingly.
""now a dash of cold water, just enough to wet it; then scatter some flour on the board, work in a little, and roll the paste out; yes, that's the way.
now put dabs of butter all over it, and roll it out again.
we wo n't have our pastry very rich, or the dolls will get dyspeptic."
daisy laughed at the idea, and scattered the dabs with a liberal hand.
then she rolled and rolled with her delightful little pin, and having got her paste ready proceeded to cover the plates with it.
next the apple was sliced in, sugar and cinnamon lavishly sprinkled over it, and then the top crust put on with breathless care.
""i always wanted to cut them round, and asia never would let me.
how nice it is to do it all my ownty donty self!"
said daisy, as the little knife went clipping round the doll's plate poised on her hand.
all cooks, even the best, meet with mishaps sometimes, and sally's first one occurred then, for the knife went so fast that the plate slipped, turned a somersault in the air, and landed the dear little pie upside down on the floor.
sally screamed, mrs. jo laughed, teddy scrambled to get it, and for a moment confusion reigned in the new kitchen.
""it did n't spill or break, because i pinched the edges together so hard; it is n't hurt a bit, so i'll prick holes in it, and then it will be ready," said sally, picking up the capsized treasure and putting it into shape with a child-like disregard of the dust it had gathered in its fall.
""my new cook has a good temper, i see, and that is such a comfort," said mrs. jo.
""now open the jar of strawberry jam, fill the uncovered pie, and put some strips of paste over the top as asia does."
""i'll make a d in the middle, and have zigzags all round, that will be so interesting when i come to eat it," said sally, loading the pie with quirls and flourishes that would have driven a real pastry cook wild.
""now i put them in!"
she exclaimed; when the last grimy knob had been carefully planted in the red field of jam, and with an air of triumph she shut them into the little oven.
""clear up your things; a good cook never lets her utensils collect.
then pare your squash and potatoes."
""there is only one potato," giggled sally.
""cut it in four pieces, so it will go into the little kettle, and put the bits into cold water till it is time to cook them."
""do i soak the squash too?"
""no, indeed!
just pare it and cut it up, and put in into the steamer over the pot.
it is drier so, though it takes longer to cook."
here a scratching at the door caused sally to run and open it, when kit appeared with a covered basket in his mouth.
""here's the butcher boy!"
cried daisy, much tickled at the idea, as she relieved him of his load, whereat he licked his lips and began to beg, evidently thinking that it was his own dinner, for he often carried it to his master in that way.
being undeceived, he departed in great wrath and barked all the way downstairs, to ease his wounded feelings.
in the basket were two bits of steak -lrb- doll's pounds -rrb-, a baked pear, a small cake, and paper with them on which asia had scrawled, "for missy's lunch, if her cookin" do n't turn out well."
""i do n't want any of her old pears and things; my cooking will turn out well, and i'll have a splendid dinner; see if i do n't!"
cried daisy, indignantly.
""we may like them if company should come.
it is always well to have something in the storeroom," said aunt jo, who had been taught this valuable fact by a series of domestic panics.
""me is hundry," announced teddy, who began to think what with so much cooking going on it was about time for somebody to eat something.
his mother gave him her workbasket to rummage, hoping to keep him quiet till dinner was ready, and returned to her housekeeping.
""put on your vegetables, set the table, and then have some coals kindling ready for the steak."
what a thing it was to see the potatoes bobbing about in the little pot; to peep at the squash getting soft so fast in the tiny steamer; to whisk open the oven door every five minutes to see how the pies got on, and at last when the coals were red and glowing, to put two real steaks on a finger-long gridiron and proudly turn them with a fork.
the potatoes were done first, and no wonder, for they had boiled frantically all the while.
the were pounded up with a little pestle, had much butter and no salt put in -lrb- cook forgot it in the excitement of the moment -rrb-, then it was made into a mound in a gay red dish, smoothed over with a knife dipped in milk, and put in the oven to brown.
so absorbed in these last performances had sally been, that she forgot her pastry till she opened the door to put in the potato, then a wail arose, for alas!
alas!
the little pies were burnt black!
""oh, my pies!
my darling pies!
they are all spoilt!"
cried poor sally, wringing her dirty little hands as she surveyed the ruin of her work.
the tart was especially pathetic, for the quirls and zigzags stuck up in all directions from the blackened jelly, like the walls and chimney of a house after a fire.
""dear, dear, i forgot to remind you to take them out; it's just my luck," said aunt jo, remorsefully.
""do n't cry, darling, it was my fault; we'll try again after dinner," she added, as a great tear dropped from sally's eyes and sizzled on the hot ruins of the tart.
more would have followed, if the steak had not blazed up just then, and so occupied the attention of cook, that she quickly forgot the lost pastry.
""put the meat-dish and your own plates down to warm, while you mash the squash with butter, salt, and a little pepper on the top," said mrs. jo, devoutly hoping that the dinner would meet with no further disasters.
the "cunning pepper-pot" soothed sally's feelings, and she dished up her squash in fine style.
the dinner was safely put upon the table; the six dolls were seated three on a side; teddy took the bottom, and sally the top.
when all were settled, it was a most imposing spectacle, for one doll was in full ball costume, another in her night-gown; jerry, the worsted boy, wore his red winter suit, while annabella, the noseless darling, was airily attired in nothing but her own kid skin.
teddy, as father of the family, behaved with great propriety, for he smilingly devoured everything offered him, and did not find a single fault.
daisy beamed upon her company like the weary, warm, but hospitable hostess so often to be seen at larger tables than this, and did the honors with an air of innocent satisfaction, which we do not often see elsewhere.
the steak was so tough that the little carving-knife would not cut it; the potato did not go round, and the squash was very lumpy; but the guests appeared politely unconscious of these trifles; and the master and mistress of the house cleared the table with appetites that anyone might envy them.
the joy of skimming a jug-full of cream mitigated the anguish felt for the loss of the pies, and asia's despised cake proved a treasure in the way of dessert.
""that is the nicest lunch i ever had; ca n't i do it every day?"
asked daisy as she scraped up and ate the leavings all round.
""you can cook things every day after lessons, but i prefer that you should eat your dishes at your regular meals, and only have a bit of gingerbread for lunch.
to-day, being the first time, i do n't mind, but we must keep our rules.
this afternoon you can make something for tea if you like," said mrs. jo, who had enjoyed the dinner-party very much, though no one had invited her to partake.
""do let me make flapjacks for demi, he loves them so, and it's such fun to turn them and put sugar in between," cried daisy, tenderly wiping a yellow stain off annabella's broken nose, for bella had refused to eat squash when it was pressed upon her as good for "lumatism," a complaint which it is no wonder she suffered from, considering the lightness of her attire.
""but if you give demi goodies, all the others will expect some also, and then you will have your hands full."
""could n't i have demi come up to tea alone just this one time?
and after that i could cook things for the others if they were good," proposed daisy, with a sudden inspiration.
""that is a capital idea, posy!
we will make your little messes rewards for the good boys, and i do n't know one among them who would not like something nice to eat more than almost anything else.
if little men are like big ones, good cooking will touch their hearts and soothe their tempers delightfully," added aunt jo, with a merry nod toward the door, where stood papa bhaer, surveying the scene with a face full of amusement.
""that last hit was for me, sharp woman.
i accept it, for it is true; but if i had married thee for thy cooking, heart's dearest, i should have fared badly all these years," answered the professor, laughing as he tossed teddy, who became quite apoplectic in his endeavors to describe the feast he had just enjoyed.
daisy proudly showed her kitchen, and rashly promised uncle fritz as many flapjacks as he could eat.
she was just telling about the new rewards when the boys, headed by demi, burst into the room snuffing the air like a pack of hungry hounds, for school was out, dinner was not ready, and the fragrance of daisy's steak led them straight to the spot.
a prouder little damsel was never seen than sally as she displayed her treasures and told the lads what was in store for them.
several rather scoffed at the idea of her cooking anything fit to eat, but stuffy's heart was won at once.
nat and demi had firm faith in her skill, and the others said they would wait and see.
all admired the kitchen, however, and examined the stove with deep interest.
demi offered to buy the boiler on the spot, to be used in a steam-engine which he was constructing; and ned declared that the best and biggest saucepan was just the thing to melt his lead in when he ran bullets, hatchets, and such trifles.
daisy looked so alarmed at these proposals, that mrs. jo then and there made and proclaimed a law that no boy should touch, use, or even approach the sacred stove without a special permit from the owner thereof.
this increased its value immensely in the eyes of the gentlemen, especially as any infringement of the law would be punished by forfeiture of all right to partake of the delicacies promised to the virtuous.
at this point the bell rang, and the entire population went down to dinner, which meal was enlivened by each of the boys giving daisy a list of things he would like to have cooked for him as fast as he earned them.
daisy, whose faith in her stove was unlimited, promised everything, if aunt jo would tell her how to make them.
this suggestion rather alarmed mrs. jo, for some of the dishes were quite beyond her skill wedding-cake, for instance, bull's - eye candy; and cabbage soup with herrings and cherries in it, which mr. bhaer proposed as his favorite, and immediately reduced his wife to despair, for german cookery was beyond her.
daisy wanted to begin again the minute dinner was done, but she was only allowed to clear up, fill the kettle ready for tea, and wash out her apron, which looked as if she had a christmas feast.
she was then sent out to play till five o'clock, for uncle fritz said that too much study, even at cooking stoves, was bad for little minds and bodies, and aunt jo knew by long experience how soon new toys lose their charm if they are not prudently used.
everyone was very kind to daisy that afternoon.
tommy promised her the first fruits of his garden, though the only visible crop just then was pigweed; nat offered to supply her with wood, free of charge; stuffy quite worshipped her; ned immediately fell to work on a little refrigerator for her kitchen; and demi, with a punctuality beautiful to see in one so young, escorted her to the nursery just as the clock struck five.
it was not time for the party to begin, but he begged so hard to come in and help that he was allowed privileges few visitors enjoy, for he kindled the fire, ran errands, and watched the progress of his supper with intense interest.
mrs. jo directed the affair as she came and went, being very busy putting up clean curtains all over the house.
""ask asia for a cup of sour cream, then your cakes will be light without much soda, which i do n't like," was the first order.
demi tore downstairs, and returned with the cream, also a puckered-up face, for he had tasted it on his way, and found it so sour that he predicted the cakes would be uneatable.
mrs. jo took this occasion to deliver a short lecture from the step-ladder on the chemical properties of soda, to which daisy did not listen, but demi did, and understood it, as he proved by the brief but comprehensive reply: "yes, i see, soda turns sour things sweet, and the fizzling up makes them light.
let's see you do it, daisy."
""fill that bowl nearly full of flour and add a little salt to it," continued mrs. jo.
""oh dear, everything has to have salt in it, seems to me," said sally, who was tired of opening the pill-box in which it was kept.
""salt is like good-humor, and nearly every thing is better for a pinch of it, posy," and uncle fritz stopped as he passed, hammer in hand, to drive up two or three nails for sally's little pans to hang on.
""you are not invited to tea, but i'll give you some cakes, and i wo n't be cross," said daisy, putting up her floury little face to thank him with a kiss.
""fritz, you must not interrupt my cooking class, or i'll come in and moralize when you are teaching latin.
how would you like that?"
said mrs. jo, throwing a great chintz curtain down on his head.
""very much, try it and see," and the amiable father bhaer went singing and tapping about the house like a mammoth woodpecker.
""put the soda into the cream, and when it "fizzles," as demi says, stir it into the flour, and beat it up as hard as ever you can.
have your griddle hot, butter it well, and then fry away till i come back," and aunt jo vanished also.
such a clatter as the little spoon made, and such a beating as the batter got, it quite foamed, i assure you; and when daisy poured some on to the griddle, it rose like magic into a puffy flapjack that made demi's mouth water.
to be sure, the first one stuck and scorched, because she forgot the butter, but after that first failure all went well, and six capital little cakes were safely landed in a dish.
""i think i like maple-syrup better than sugar," said demi, from his arm-chair where he had settled himself after setting the table in a new and peculiar manner.
""then go and ask asia for some," answered daisy, going into the bath-room to wash her hands.
while the nursery was empty something dreadful happened.
you see, kit had been feeling hurt all day because he had carried meat safely and yet got none to pay him.
he was not a bad dog, but he had his little faults like the rest of us, and could not always resist temptation.
happening to stroll into the nursery at that moment, he smelt the cakes, saw them unguarded on the low table, and never stopping to think of consequences, swallowed all six at one mouthful.
i am glad to say that they were very hot, and burned him so badly that he could not repress a surprised yelp.
daisy heard it, ran in, saw the empty dish, also the end of a yellow tail disappearing under the bed.
without a word she seized that tail, pulled out the thief, and shook him till his ears flapped wildly, then bundled him down-stairs to the shed, where he spent a lonely evening in the coal-bin.
cheered by the sympathy which demi gave her, daisy made another bowlful of batter, and fried a dozen cakes, which were even better than the others.
indeed, uncle fritz after eating two sent up word that he had never tasted any so nice, and every boy at the table below envied demi at the flapjack party above.
it was a truly delightful supper, for the little teapot lid only fell off three times and the milk jug upset but once; the cakes floated in syrup, and the toast had a delicious beef-steak flavor, owing to cook's using the gridiron to make it on.
demi forgot philosophy, and stuffed like any carnal boy, while daisy planned sumptuous banquets, and the dolls looked on smiling affably.
""well, dearies, have you had a good time?"
asked mrs. jo, coming up with teddy on her shoulder.
""a very good time.
i shall come again soon," answered demi, with emphasis.
""i'm afraid you have eaten too much, by the look of that table."
""no, i have n't; i only ate fifteen cakes, and they were very little ones," protested demi, who had kept his sister busy supplying his plate.
""they wo n't hurt him, they are so nice," said daisy, with such a funny mixture of maternal fondness and housewifely pride that aunt jo could only smile and say: "well, on the whole, the new game is a success then?"
""i like it," said demi, as if his approval was all that was necessary.
""it is the dearest play ever made!"
cried daisy, hugging her little dish-tub as she proposed to wash up the cups.
""i just wish everybody had a sweet cooking stove like mine," she added, regarding it with affection.
""this play out to have a name," said demi, gravely removing the syrup from his countenance with his tongue.
""it has."
""oh, what?"
asked both children eagerly.
""well, i think we will call it pattypans," and aunt jo retired, satisfied with the success of her last trap to catch a sunbeam.
chapter vi.
a fire brand "please, ma'am, could i speak to you?
it is something very important," said nat, popping his head in at the door of mrs. bhaer's room.
it was the fifth head which had popped in during the last half-hour; but mrs. jo was used to it, so she looked up, and said, briskly, "what is it, my lad?"
nat came in, shut the door carefully behind him, and said in an eager, anxious tone, "dan has come."
""who is dan?"
""he's a boy i used to know when i fiddled round the streets.
he sold papers, and he was kind to me, and i saw him the other day in town, and told him how nice it was here, and he's come."
""but, my dear boy, that is rather a sudden way to pay a visit."
""oh, it is n't a visit; he wants to stay if you will let him!"
said nat innocently.
""well, i do n't know about that," began mrs. bhaer, rather startled by the coolness of the proposition.
""why, i thought you liked to have poor boys come and live with you, and be kind to'em as you were to me," said nat, looking surprised and alarmed.
""so i do, but i like to know something about them first.
i have to choose them, because there are so many.
i have not room for all.
i wish i had."
""i told him to come because i thought you'd like it, but if there is n't room he can go away again," said nat, sorrowfully.
the boy's confidence in her hospitality touched mrs. bhaer, and she could not find the heart to disappoint his hope, and spoil his kind little plan, so she said, "tell me about this dan."
""i do n't know any thing, only he has n't got any folks, and he's poor, and he was good to me, so i'd like to be good to him if i could."
""excellent reasons every one; but really, nat, the house is full, and i do n't know where i could put him," said mrs. bhaer, more and more inclined to prove herself the haven of refuge he seemed to think her.
""he could have my bed, and i could sleep in the barn.
it is n't cold now, and i do n't mind, i used to sleep anywhere with father," said nat, eagerly.
something in his speech and face made mrs. jo put her hand on his shoulder, and say in her kindest tone: "bring in your friend, nat; i think we must find room for him without giving him your place."
nat joyfully ran off, and soon returned followed by a most unprepossessing boy, who slouched in and stood looking about him, with a half bold, half sullen look, which made mrs. bhaer say to herself, after one glance, "a bad specimen, i am afraid."
""this is dan," said nat, presenting him as if sure of his welcome.
""nat tells me you would like to come and stay with us," began mrs. jo, in a friendly tone.
""yes," was the gruff reply.
""have you no friends to take care of you?"
""no."
""say, "no, ma'am,"" whispered nat.
""sha n't neither," muttered dan.
""how old are you?"
""about fourteen."
""you look older.
what can you do?""
"most anything."
""if you stay here we shall want you to do as the others do, work and study as well as play.
are you willing to agree to that?"
""do n't mind trying."
""well, you can stay a few days, and we will see how we get on together.
take him out, nat, and amuse him till mr. bhaer comes home, when we will settle about the matter," said mrs. jo, finding it rather difficult to get on with this cool young person, who fixed his big black eyes on her with a hard, suspicious expression, sorrowfully unboyish.
""come on, nat," he said, and slouched out again.
""thank you, ma'am," added nat, as he followed him, feeling without quite understanding the difference in the welcome given to him and to his ungracious friend.
""the fellows are having a circus out in the barn; do n't you want to come and see it?"
he asked, as they came down the wide steps on to the lawn.
""are they big fellows?"
said dan.
""no; the big ones are gone fishing."
""fire away, then," said dan.
nat led him to the great barn and introduced him to his set, who were disporting themselves among the half-empty lofts.
a large circle was marked out with hay on the wide floor, and in the middle stood demi with a long whip, while tommy, mounted on the much-enduring toby, pranced about the circle playing being a monkey.
""you must pay a pin apiece, or you ca n't see the show," said stuffy, who stood by the wheelbarrow in which sat the band, consisting of a pocket-comb blown upon by ned, and a toy drum beaten spasmodically by rob.
""he's company, so i'll pay for both," said nat, handsomely, as he stuck two crooked pins in the dried mushroom which served as money-box.
with a nod to the company they seated themselves on a couple of boards, and the performance went on.
after the monkey act, ned gave them a fine specimen of his agility by jumping over an old chair, and running up and down ladders, sailor fashion.
then demi danced a jig with a gravity beautiful to behold.
nat was called upon to wrestle with stuffy, and speedily laid that stout youth upon the ground.
after this, tommy proudly advanced to turn a somersault, an accomplishment which he had acquired by painful perseverance, practising in private till every joint of his little frame was black and blue.
his feats were received with great applause, and he was about to retire, flushed with pride and a rush of blood to the head, when a scornful voice in the audience was heard to say, "ho!
that ai n't any thing!"
""say that again, will you?"
and tommy bristled up like an angry turkey-cock.
""do you want to fight?"
said dan, promptly descending from the barrel and doubling up his fists in a business-like manner.
""no, i do n't;" and the candid thomas retired a step, rather taken aback by the proposition.
""fighting is n't allowed!"
cried the others, much excited.
""you're a nice lot," sneered dan.
""come, if you do n't behave, you sha n't stay," said nat, firing up at that insult to his friends.
""i'd like to see him do better than i did, that's all," observed tommy, with a swagger.
""clear the way, then," and without the slightest preparation dan turned three somersaults one after the other and came up on his feet.
""you ca n't beat that, tom; you always hit your head and tumble flat," said nat, pleased at his friend's success.
before he could say any more the audience were electrified by three more somersaults backwards, and a short promenade on the hands, head down, feet up.
this brought down the house, and tommy joined in the admiring cries which greeted the accomplished gymnast as he righted himself, and looked at them with an air of calm superiority.
""do you think i could learn to do it without its hurting me very much?"
tom meekly asked, as he rubbed the elbows which still smarted after the last attempt.
""what will you give me if i'll teach you?"
said dan.
""my new jack-knife; it's got five blades, and only one is broken."
""give it here, then."
tommy handed it over with an affectionate look at its smooth handle.
dan examined it carefully, then putting it into his pocket, walked off, saying with a wink, "keep it up till you learn, that's all."
a howl of wrath from tommy was followed by a general uproar, which did not subside till dan, finding himself in a minority, proposed that they should play stick-knife, and whichever won should have the treasure.
tommy agreed, and the game was played in a circle of excited faces, which all wore an expression of satisfaction, when tommy won and secured the knife in the depth of his safest pocket.
""you come off with me, and i'll show you round," said nat, feeling that he must have a little serious conversation with his friend in private.
what passed between them no one knew, but when they appeared again, dan was more respectful to every one, though still gruff in his speech, and rough in his manner; and what else could be expected of the poor lad who had been knocking about the world all his short life with no one to teach him any better?
the boys had decided that they did not like him, and so they left him to nat, who soon felt rather oppressed by the responsibility, but too kind-hearted to desert him.
tommy, however, felt that in spite of the jack-knife transaction, there was a bond of sympathy between them, and longed to return to the interesting subject of somersaults.
he soon found an opportunity, for dan, seeing how much he admired him, grew more amiable, and by the end of the first week was quite intimate with the lively tom.
mr. bhaer, when he heard the story and saw dan, shook his head, but only said quietly, "the experiment may cost us something, but we will try it."
if dan felt any gratitude for his protection, he did not show it, and took without thanks all that was give him.
he was ignorant, but very quick to learn when he chose; had sharp eyes to watch what went on about him; a saucy tongue, rough manners, and a temper that was fierce and sullen by turns.
he played with all his might, and played well at almost all the games.
he was silent and gruff before grown people, and only now and then was thoroughly sociable among the lads.
few of them really liked him, but few could help admiring his courage and strength, for nothing daunted him, and he knocked tall franz flat on one occasion with an ease that caused all the others to keep at a respectful distance from his fists.
mr. bhaer watched him silently, and did his best to tame the "wild boy," as they called him, but in private the worthy man shook his head, and said soberly, "i hope the experiment will turn out well, but i am a little afraid it may cost too much."
mrs. bhaer lost her patience with him half a dozen times a day, yet never gave him up, and always insisted that there was something good in the lad, after all; for he was kinder to animals than to people, he liked to rove about in the woods, and, best of all, little ted was fond of him.
what the secret was no one could discover, but baby took to him at once gabbled and crowed whenever he saw him preferred his strong back to ride on to any of the others and called him "my danny" out of his own little head.
teddy was the only creature to whom dan showed an affection, and this was only manifested when he thought no one else would see it; but mothers" eyes are quick, and motherly hearts instinctively divine who love their babies.
so mrs. jo soon saw and felt that there was a soft spot in rough dan, and bided her time to touch and win him.
but an unexpected and decidedly alarming event upset all their plans, and banished dan from plumfield.
tommy, nat, and demi began by patronizing dan, because the other lads rather slighted him; but soon they each felt there was a certain fascination about the bad boy, and from looking down upon him they came to looking up, each for a different reason.
tommy admired his skill and courage; nat was grateful for past kindness; and demi regarded him as a sort of animated story book, for when he chose dan could tell his adventures in a most interesting way.
it pleased dan to have the three favorites like him, and he exerted himself to be agreeable, which was the secret of his success.
the bhaers were surprised, but hoped the lads would have a good influence over dan, and waited with some anxiety, trusting that no harm would come of it.
dan felt they did not quite trust him, and never showed them his best side, but took a wilful pleasure in trying their patience and thwarting their hopes as far as he dared.
mr. bhaer did not approve of fighting, and did not think it a proof of either manliness or courage for two lads to pommel one another for the amusement of the rest.
all sorts of hardy games and exercises were encouraged, and the boys were expected to take hard knocks and tumbles without whining; but black eyes and bloody noses given for the fun of it were forbidden as a foolish and a brutal play.
dan laughed at this rule, and told such exciting tales of his own valor, and the many frays that he had been in, that some of the lads were fired with a desire to have a regular good "mill."
""do n't tell, and i'll show you how," said dan; and, getting half a dozen of the lads together behind the barn, he gave them a lesson in boxing, which quite satisfied the ardor of most of them.
emil, however, could not submit to be beaten by a fellow younger than himself, for emil was past fourteen and a plucky fellow, so he challenged dan to a fight.
dan accepted at once, and the others looked on with intense interest.
what little bird carried the news to head-quarters no one ever knew, but, in the very hottest of the fray, when dan and emil were fighting like a pair of young bulldogs, and the others with fierce, excited faces were cheering them on, mr. bhaer walked into the ring, plucked the combatants apart with a strong hand, and said, in the voice they seldom heard, "i ca n't allow this, boys!
stop it at once; and never let me see it again.
i keep a school for boys, not for wild beasts.
look at each other and be ashamed of yourselves."
""you let me go, and i'll knock him down again," shouted dan, sparring away in spite of the grip on his collar.
""come on, come on, i ai n't thrashed yet!"
cried emil, who had been down five times, but did not know when he was beaten.
""they are playing be gladdy what-you-call -'em s, like the romans, uncle fritz," called out demi, whose eyes were bigger than ever with the excitement of this new pastime.
""they were a fine set of brutes; but we have learned something since then, i hope, and i can not have you make my barn a colosseum.
who proposed this?"
asked mr. bhaer.
""dan," answered several voices.
""do n't you know that it is forbidden?"
""yes," growled dan, sullenly.
""then why break the rule?"
""they'll all be molly-coddles, if they do n't know how to fight."
""have you found emil a molly-coddle?
he does n't look much like one," and mr. bhaer brought the two face to face.
dan had a black eye, and his jacket was torn to rags, but emil's face was covered with blood from a cut lip and a bruised nose, while a bump on his forehead was already as purple as a plum.
in spite of his wounds however, he still glared upon his foe, and evidently panted to renew the fight.
""he'd make a first-rater if he was taught," said dan, unable to withhold the praise from the boy who made it necessary for him to do his best.
""he'll be taught to fence and box by and by, and till then i think he will do very well without any lessons in mauling.
go and wash your faces; and remember, dan, if you break any more of the rules again, you will be sent away.
that was the bargain; do your part and we will do ours."
the lads went off, and after a few more words to the spectators, mr. bhaer followed to bind up the wounds of the young gladiators.
emil went to bed sick, and dan was an unpleasant spectacle for a week.
but the lawless lad had no thought of obeying, and soon transgressed again.
one saturday afternoon as a party of the boys went out to play, tommy said, "let's go down to the river, and cut a lot of new fish-poles."
""take toby to drag them back, and one of us can ride him down," proposed stuffy, who hated to walk.
""that means you, i suppose; well, hurry up, lazy-bones," said dan.
away they went, and having got the poles were about to go home, when demi unluckily said to tommy, who was on toby with a long rod in his hand, "you look like the picture of the man in the bull-fight, only you have n't got a red cloth, or pretty clothes on."
""i'd like to see one; there's old buttercup in the big meadow, ride at her, tom, and see her run," proposed dan, bent on mischief.
""no, you must n't," began demi, who was learning to distrust dan's propositions.
""why not, little fuss-button?"
demanded dan.
""i do n't think uncle fritz would like it."
""did he ever say we must not have a bull-fight?"
""no, i do n't think he ever did," admitted demi.
""then hold your tongue.
drive on, tom, and here's a red rag to flap at the old thing.
i'll help you to stir her up," and over the wall went dan, full of the new game, and the rest followed like a flock of sheep; even demi, who sat upon the bars, and watched the fun with interest.
poor buttercup was not in a very good mood, for she had been lately bereft of her calf, and mourned for the little thing most dismally.
just now she regarded all mankind as her enemies -lrb- and i do not blame her -rrb-, so when the matadore came prancing towards her with the red handkerchief flying at the end of his long lance, she threw up her head, and gave a most appropriate "moo!"
tommy rode gallantly at her, and toby recognizing an old friend, was quite willing to approach; but when the lance came down on her back with a loud whack, both cow and donkey were surprised and disgusted.
toby back with a bray of remonstrance, and buttercup lowered her horns angrily.
""at her again, tom; she's jolly cross, and will do it capitally!"
called dan, coming up behind with another rod, while jack and ned followed his example.
seeing herself thus beset, and treated with such disrespect, buttercup trotted round the field, getting more and more bewildered and excited every moment, for whichever way she turned, there was a dreadful boy, yelling and brandishing a new and very disagreeable sort of whip.
it was great fun for them, but real misery for her, till she lost patience and turned the tables in the most unexpected manner.
all at once she wheeled short round, and charged full at her old friend toby, whose conduct cut her to the heart.
poor slow toby backed so precipitately that he tripped over a stone, and down went horse, matadore, and all, in one ignominious heap, while distracted buttercup took a surprising leap over the wall, and galloped wildly out of sight down the road.
""catch her, stop her, head her off!
run, boys, run!"
shouted dan, tearing after her at his best pace, for she was mr. bhaer's pet alderney, and if anything happened to her, dan feared it would be all over with him.
such a running and racing and bawling and puffing as there was before she was caught!
the fish-poles were left behind; toby was trotted nearly off his legs in the chase; and every boy was red, breathless, and scared.
they found poor buttercup at last in a flower garden, where she had taken refuge, worn out with the long run.
borrowing a rope for a halter, dan led her home, followed by a party of very sober young gentlemen, for the cow was in a sad state, having strained her shoulder jumping, so that she limped, her eyes looked wild, and her glossy coat was wet and muddy.
""you'll catch it this time, dan," said tommy, as he led the wheezing donkey beside the maltreated cow.
""so will you, for you helped."
""we all did, but demi," added jack.
""he put it into our heads," said ned.
""i told you not to do it," cried demi, who was most broken-hearted at poor buttercup's state.
""old bhaer will send me off, i guess.
do n't care if he does," muttered dan, looking worried in spite of his words.
""we'll ask him not to, all of us," said demi, and the others assented with the exception of stuffy, who cherished the hope that all the punishment might fall on one guilty head.
dan only said, "do n't bother about me;" but he never forgot it, even though he led the lads astray again, as soon as the temptation came.
when mr. bhaer saw the animal, and heard the story, he said very little, evidently fearing that he should say too much in the first moments of impatience.
buttercup was made comfortable in her stall, and the boys sent to their rooms till supper-time.
this brief respite gave them time to think the matter over, to wonder what the penalty would be, and to try to imagine where dan would be sent.
he whistled briskly in his room, so that no one should think he cared a bit; but while he waited to know his fate, the longing to stay grew stronger and stronger, the more he recalled the comfort and kindness he had known here, the hardship and neglect he had felt elsewhere.
he knew they tried to help him, and at the bottom of his heart he was grateful, but his rough life had made him hard and careless, suspicious and wilful.
he hated restraint of any sort, and fought against it like an untamed creature, even while he knew it was kindly meant, and dimly felt that he would be the better for it.
he made up his mind to be turned adrift again, to knock about the city as he had done nearly all his life; a prospect that made him knit his black brows, and look about the cosy little room with a wistful expression that would have touched a much harder heart than mr. bhaer's if he had seen it.
it vanished instantly, however, when the good man came in, and said in his accustomed grave way, "i have heard all about it, dan, and though you have broken the rules again, i am going to give you one more trial, to please mother bhaer."
dan flushed up to his forehead at this unexpected reprieve, but he only said in his gruff way, "i did n't know there was any rule about bull-fighting."
""as i never expected to have any at plumfield, i never did make such a rule," answered mr. bhaer, smiling in spite of himself at the boy's excuse.
then he added gravely, "but one of the first and most important of our few laws is the law of kindness to every dumb creature on the place.
i want everybody and everything to be happy here, to love and trust, and serve us, as we try to love and trust and serve them faithfully and willingly.
i have often said that you were kinder to the animals than any of the other boys, and mrs. bhaer liked that trait in you very much, because she thought it showed a good heart.
but you have disappointed us in that, and we are sorry, for we hoped to make you quite one of us.
shall we try again?"
dan's eyes had been on the floor, and his hands nervously picking at the bit of wood he had been whittling as mr. bhaer came in, but when he heard the kind voice ask that question, he looked up quickly, and said in a more respectful tone than he had ever used before, "yes, please."
""very well, then, we will say no more, only you will stay at home from the walk to-morrow, as the other boys will and all of you must wait on poor buttercup till she is well again."
""i will."
""now, go down to supper, and do your best, my boy, more for your own sake than for ours."
then mr. bhaer shook hands with him, and dan went down more tamed by kindness than he would have been by the good whipping which asia had strongly recommended.
dan did try for a day or two, but not being used to it, he soon tired and relapsed into his old wilful ways.
mr. bhaer was called from home on business one day, and the boys had no lessons.
they liked this, and played hard till bedtime, when most of them turned in and slept like dormice.
dan, however, had a plan in his head, and when he and nat were alone, he unfolded it.
""look here!"
he said, taking from under his bed a bottle, a cigar, and a pack of cards, "i'm going to have some fun, and do as i used to with the fellows in town.
here's some beer, i got if of the old man at the station, and this cigar; you can pay for'em or tommy will, he's got heaps of money and i have n't a cent.
i'm going to ask him in; no, you go, they wo n't mind you."
""the folks wo n't like it," began nat.
""they wo n't know.
daddy bhaer is away, and mrs. bhaer's busy with ted; he's got croup or something, and she ca n't leave him.
we sha n't sit up late or make any noise, so where's the harm?"
""asia will know if we burn the lamp long, she always does."
""no, she wo n't, i've got a dark lantern on purpose; it do n't give much light, and we can shut it quick if we hear anyone coming," said dan.
this idea struck nat as a fine one, and lent an air of romance to the thing.
he started off to tell tommy, but put his head in again to say, "you want demi, too, do n't you?"
""no, i do n't; the deacon will rollup eyes and preach if you tell him.
he will be asleep, so just tip the wink to tom and cut back again."
nat obeyed, and returned in a minute with tommy half dressed, rather tousled about the head and very sleepy, but quite ready for fun as usual.
""now, keep quiet, and i'll show you how to play a first-rate game called "poker,"" said dan, as the three revellers gathered round the table, on which were set forth the bottle, the cigar, and the cards.
""first we'll all have a drink, then we'll take a go at the "weed," and then we'll play.
that's the way men do, and it's jolly fun."
the beer circulated in a mug, and all three smacked their lips over it, though nat and tommy did not like the bitter stuff.
the cigar was worse still, but they dared not say so, and each puffed away till he was dizzy or choked, when he passed the "weed" on to his neighbor.
dan liked it, for it seemed like old times when he now and then had a chance to imitate the low men who surrounded him.
he drank, and smoked, and swaggered as much like them as he could, and, getting into the spirit of the part he assumed, he soon began to swear under his breath for fear some one should hear him.
""you must n't; it's wicked to say "damn!""
cried tommy, who had followed his leader so far.
""oh, hang!
do n't you preach, but play away; it's part of the fun to swear."
""i'd rather say "thunder turtles,"" said tommy, who had composed this interesting exclamation and was very proud of it.
""and i'll say "the devil;" that sounds well," added nat, much impressed by dan's manly ways.
dan scoffed at their "nonsense," and swore stoutly as he tried to teach them the new game.
but tommy was very sleepy, and nat's head began to ache with the beer and the smoke, so neither of them was very quick to learn, and the game dragged.
the room was nearly dark, for the lantern burned badly; they could not laugh loud nor move about much, for silas slept next door in the shed-chamber, and altogether the party was dull.
in the middle of a deal dan stopped suddenly, and called out, "who's that?"
in a startled tone, and at the same moment drew the slide over the light.
a voice in the darkness said tremulously, "i ca n't find tommy," and then there was the quick patter of bare feet running away down the entry that led from the wing to the main house.
""it's demi!
he's gone to call some one; cut into bed, tom, and do n't tell!"
cried dan, whisking all signs of the revel out of sight, and beginning to tear off his clothes, while nat did the same.
tommy flew to his room and dived into bed, where he lay, laughing till something burned his hand, when he discovered that he was still clutching the stump of the festive cigar, which he happened to be smoking when the revel broke up.
it was nearly out, and he was about to extinguish it carefully when nursey's voice was heard, and fearing it would betray him if he hid it in the bed, he threw it underneath, after a final pinch which he thought finished it.
nursey came in with demi, who looked much amazed to see the red face of tommy reposing peacefully upon his pillow.
""he was n't there just now, because i woke up and could not find him anywhere," said demi, pouncing on him.
""what mischief are you at now, bad child?"
asked nursey, with a good-natured shake, which made the sleeper open his eyes to say meekly, "i only ran into nat's room to see him about something.
go away, and let me alone; i'm awful sleepy."
nursey tucked demi in, and went off to reconnoitre, but only found two boys slumbering peacefully in dan's room.
""some little frolic," she thought, and as there was no harm done she said nothing to mrs. bhaer, who was busy and worried over little teddy.
tommy was sleepy, and telling demi to mind his own business and not ask questions, he was snoring in ten minutes, little dreaming what was going on under his bed.
the cigar did not go out, but smouldered away on the straw carpet till it was nicely on fire, and a hungry little flame went creeping along till the dimity bedcover caught, then the sheets, and then the bed itself.
the beer made tommy sleep heavily, and the smoke stupified demi, so they slept on till the fire began to scorch them, and they were in danger of being burned to death.
franz was sitting up to study, and as he left the school-room he smelt the smoke, dashed up-stairs and saw it coming in a cloud from the left wing of the house.
without stopping to call any one, he ran into the room, dragged the boys from the blazing bed, and splashed all the water he could find at hand on to the flames.
it checked but did not quench the fire, and the children wakened on being tumbled topsy-turvy into a cold hall, began to roar at the top of their voices.
mrs. bhaer instantly appeared, and a minute after silas burst out of his room shouting, "fire!"
in a tone that raised the whole house.
a flock of white goblins with scared faces crowded into the hall, and for a minute every one was panic-stricken.
then mrs. bhaer found her wits, bade nursey see to the burnt boys, and sent franz and silas down-stairs for some tubs of wet clothes which she flung on the bed, over the carpet, and up against the curtains, now burning finely, and threatening to kindle the walls.
most of the boys stood dumbly looking on, but dan and emil worked bravely, running to and fro with water from the bath-room, and helping to pull down the dangerous curtains.
the peril was soon over, and ordering the boys all back to bed, and leaving silas to watch lest the fire broke out again, mrs. bhaer and franz went to see how the poor boys got on.
demi had escaped with one burn and a grand scare, but tommy had not only most of his hair scorched off his head, but a great burn on his arm, that made him half crazy with the pain.
demi was soon made cosy, and franz took him away to his own bed, where the kind lad soothed his fright and hummed him to sleep as cosily as a woman.
nursey watched over poor tommy all night, trying to ease his misery, and mrs. bhaer vibrated between him and little teddy with oil and cotton, paregoric and squills, saying to herself from time to time, as if she found great amusement in the thought, "i always knew tommy would set the house on fire, and now he has done it!"
when mr. bhaer got home next morning he found a nice state of things.
tommy in bed, teddy wheezing like a little grampus, mrs. jo quite used up, and the whole flock of boys so excited that they all talked at once, and almost dragged him by main force to view the ruins.
under his quiet management things soon fell into order, for every one felt that he was equal to a dozen conflagrations, and worked with a will at whatever task he gave them.
there was no school that morning, but by afternoon the damaged room was put to rights, the invalids were better, and there was time to hear and judge the little culprits quietly.
nat and tommy told their parts in the mischief, and were honestly sorry for the danger they had brought to the dear old house and all in it.
but dan put on his devil-may-care look, and would not own that there was much harm done.
now, of all things, mr. bhaer hated drinking, gambling, and swearing; smoking he had given up that the lads might not be tempted to try it, and it grieved and angered him deeply to find that the boy, with whom he had tried to be most forbearing, should take advantage of his absence to introduce these forbidden vices, and teach his innocent little lads to think it manly and pleasant to indulge in them.
he talked long and earnestly to the assembled boys, and ended by saying, with an air of mingled firmness and regret, "i think tommy is punished enough, and that scar on his arm will remind him for a long time to let these things alone.
nat's fright will do for him, for he is really sorry, and does try to obey me.
but you, dan, have been many times forgiven, and yet it does no good.
i can not have my boys hurt by your bad example, nor my time wasted in talking to deaf ears, so you can say good-bye to them all, and tell nursey to put up your things in my little black bag."
""oh!
sir, where is he going?"
cried nat.
""to a pleasant place up in the country, where i sometimes send boys when they do n't do well here.
mr. page is a kind man, and dan will be happy there if he chooses to do his best."
""will he ever come back?"
asked demi.
""that will depend on himself; i hope so."
as he spoke, mr. bhaer left the room to write his letter to mr. page, and the boys crowded round dan very much as people do about a man who is going on a long and perilous journey to unknown regions.
""i wonder if you'll like it," began jack.
""sha n't stay if i do n't," said dan coolly.
""where will you go?"
asked nat.
""i may go to sea, or out west, or take a look at california," answered dan, with a reckless air that quite took away the breath of the little boys.
""oh, do n't!
stay with mr. page awhile and then come back here; do, dan," pleaded nat, much affected at the whole affair.
""i do n't care where i go, or how long i stay, and i'll be hanged if i ever come back here," with which wrathful speech dan went away to put up his things, every one of which mr. bhaer had given him.
that was the only good-bye he gave the boys, for they were all talking the matter over in the barn when he came down, and he told nat not to call them.
the wagon stood at the door, and mrs. bhaer came out to speak to dan, looking so sad that his heart smote him, and he said in a low tone, "may i say good-bye to teddy?"
""yes, dear; go in and kiss him, he will miss his danny very much."
no one saw the look in dan's eyes as he stooped over the crib, and saw the little face light up at first sight of him, but he heard mrs. bhaer say pleadingly, "ca n't we give the poor lad one more trial, fritz?"
and mr. bhaer answer in his steady way, "my dear, it is not best, so let him go where he can do no harm to others, while they do good to him, and by and by he shall come back, i promise you."
""he's the only boy we ever failed with, and i am so grieved, for i thought there was the making of a fine man in him, spite of his faults."
dan heard mrs. bhaer sigh, and he wanted to ask for one more trial himself, but his pride would not let him, and he came out with the hard look on his face, shook hands without a word, and drove away with mr. bhaer, leaving nat and mrs. jo to look after him with tears in their eyes.
a few days afterwards they received a letter from mr. page, saying that dan was doing well, whereat they all rejoiced.
but three weeks later came another letter, saying that dan had run away, and nothing had been heard of him, whereat they all looked sober, and mr. bhaer said, "perhaps i ought to have given him another chance."
mrs. bhaer, however, nodded wisely and answered, "do n't be troubled, fritz; the boy will come back to us, i'm sure of it."
but time went on and no dan came.
chapter vii.
naughty nan "fritz, i've got a new idea," cried mrs. bhaer, as she met her husband one day after school.
""well, my dear, what is it?"
and he waited willingly to hear the new plan, for some of mrs. jo's ideas were so droll, it was impossible to help laughing at them, though usually they were quite sensible, and he was glad to carry them out.
""daisy needs a companion, and the boys would be all the better for another girl among them; you know we believe in bringing up little men and women together, and it is high time we acted up to our belief.
they pet and tyrannize over daisy by turns, and she is getting spoilt.
then they must learn gentle ways, and improve their manners, and having girls about will do it better than any thing else."
""you are right, as usual.
now, who shall we have?"
asked mr. bhaer, seeing by the look in her eye that mrs. jo had some one all ready to propose.
""little annie harding."
""what!
naughty nan, as the lads call her?"
cried mr. bhaer, looking very much amused.
""yes, she is running wild at home since her mother died, and is too bright a child to be spoilt by servants.
i have had my eye on her for some time, and when i met her father in town the other day i asked him why he did not send her to school.
he said he would gladly if he could find as good a school for girls as ours was for boys.
i know he would rejoice to have her come; so suppose we drive over this afternoon and see about it."
""have not you cares enough now, my jo, without this little gypsy to torment you?"
asked mr. bhaer, patting the hand that lay on his arm.
""oh dear, no," said mother bhaer, briskly.
""i like it, and never was happier than since i had my wilderness of boys.
you see, fritz, i feel a great sympathy for nan, because i was such a naughty child myself that i know all about it.
she is full of spirits, and only needs to be taught what to do with them to be as nice a little girl as daisy.
those quick wits of hers would enjoy lessons if they were rightly directed, and what is now a tricksy midget would soon become a busy, happy child.
i know how to manage her, for i remember how my blessed mother managed me, and --" "and if you succeed half as well as she did, you will have done a magnificent work," interrupted mr. bhaer, who labored under the delusion that mrs. b. was the best and most charming woman alive.
""now, if you make fun of my plan i'll give you bad coffee for a week, and then where are you, sir?"
cried mrs. jo, tweaking him by the ear just as if he was one of the boys.
""wo n't daisy's hair stand erect with horror at nan's wild ways?"
asked mr. bhaer, presently, when teddy had swarmed up his waistcoat, and rob up his back, for they always flew at their father the minute school was done.
""at first, perhaps, but it will do posy good.
she is getting prim and bettyish, and needs stirring up a bit.
she always has a good time when nan comes over to play, and the two will help each other without knowing it.
dear me, half the science of teaching is knowing how much children do for one another, and when to mix them."
""i only hope she wo n't turn out another firebrand."
""my poor dan!
i never can quite forgive myself for letting him go," sighed mrs. bhaer.
at the sound of the name, little teddy, who had never forgotten his friend, struggled down from his father's arms, and trotted to the door, looked out over the sunny lawn with a wistful face, and then trotted back again, saying, as he always did when disappointed of the longed-for sight, "my danny's tummin" soon."
""i really think we ought to have kept him, if only for teddy's sake, he was so fond of him, and perhaps baby's love would have done for him what we failed to do."
""i've sometimes felt that myself; but after keeping the boys in a ferment, and nearly burning up the whole family, i thought it safer to remove the firebrand, for a time at least," said mr. bhaer.
""dinner's ready, let me ring the bell," and rob began a solo upon that instrument which made it impossible to hear one's self speak.
""then i may have nan, may i?"
asked mrs. jo.
""a dozen nans if you want them, my dear," answered mr. bhaer, who had room in his fatherly heart for all the naughty neglected children in the world.
when mrs. bhaer returned from her drive that afternoon, before she could unpack the load of little boys, without whom she seldom moved, a small girl of ten skipped out at the back of the carry-all and ran into the house, shouting, "hi, daisy!
where are you?"
daisy came, and looked pleased to see her guest, but also a trifle alarmed, when nan said, still prancing, as if it was impossible to keep still, "i'm going to stay here always, papa says i may, and my box is coming tomorrow, all my things had to be washed and mended, and your aunt came and carried me off.
is n't it great fun?"
""why, yes.
did you bring your big doll?"
asked daisy, hoping she had, for on the last visit nan had ravaged the baby house, and insisted on washing blanche matilda's plaster face, which spoilt the poor dear's complexion for ever.
""yes, she's somewhere round," returned nan, with most unmaternal carelessness.
""i made you a ring coming along, and pulled the hairs out of dobbin's tail.
do n't you want it?"
and nan presented a horse-hair ring in token of friendship, as they had both vowed they would never speak to one another again when they last parted.
won by the beauty of the offering, daisy grew more cordial, and proposed retiring to the nursery, but nan said, "no, i want to see the boys, and the barn," and ran off, swinging her hat by one string till it broke, when she left it to its fate on the grass.
""hullo!
nan!"
cried the boys as she bounced in among them with the announcement, "i'm going to stay."
""hooray!"
bawled tommy from the wall on which he was perched, for nan was a kindred spirit, and he foresaw "larks" in the future.
""i can bat; let me play," said nan, who could turn her hand to any thing, and did not mind hard knocks.
""we ai n't playing now, and our side beat without you."
""i can beat you in running, any way," returned nan, falling back on her strong point.
""can she?"
asked nat of jack.
""she runs very well for a girl," answered jack, who looked down upon nan with condescending approval.
""will you try?"
said nan, longing to display her powers.
""it's too hot," and tommy languished against the wall as if quite exhausted.
""what's the matter with stuffy?"
asked nan, whose quick eyes were roving from face to face.
""ball hurt his hand; he howls at every thing," answered jack scornfully.
""i do n't, i never cry, no matter how i'm hurt; it's babyish," said nan, loftily.
""pooh!
i could make you cry in two minutes," returned stuffy, rousing up.
""see if you can."
""go and pick that bunch of nettles, then," and stuffy pointed to a sturdy specimen of that prickly plant growing by the wall.
nan instantly "grasped the nettle," pulled it up, and held it with a defiant gesture, in spite of the almost unbearable sting.
""good for you," cried the boys, quick to acknowledge courage even in one of the weaker sex.
more nettled than she was, stuffy determined to get a cry out of her somehow, and he said tauntingly, "you are used to poking your hands into every thing, so that is n't fair.
now go and bump your head real hard against the barn, and see if you do n't howl then."
""do n't do it," said nat, who hated cruelty.
but nan was off, and running straight at the barn, she gave her head a blow that knocked her flat, and sounded like a battering-ram.
dizzy, but undaunted, she staggered up, saying stoutly, though her face was drawn with pain, "that hurt, but i do n't cry."
""do it again," said stuffy angrily; and nan would have done it, but nat held her; and tommy, forgetting the heat, flew at stuffy like a little game-cock, roaring out, "stop it, or i'll throw you over the barn!"
and so shook and hustled poor stuffy that for a minute he did not know whether he was on his head or his heels.
""she told me to," was all he could say, when tommy let him alone.
""never mind if she did; it is awfully mean to hurt a little girl," said demi, reproachfully.
""ho!
i do n't mind; i ai n't a little girl, i'm older than you and daisy; so now," cried nan, ungratefully.
""do n't preach, deacon, you bully posy every day of your life," called out the commodore, who just then hove in sight.
""i do n't hurt her; do i, daisy?"
and demi turned to his sister, who was "pooring" nan's tingling hands, and recommending water for the purple lump rapidly developing itself on her forehead.
""you are the best boy in the world," promptly answered daisy; adding, as truth compelled her to do, "you hurt me sometimes, but you do n't mean to."
""put away the bats and things, and mind what you are about, my hearties.
no fighting allowed aboard this ship," said emil, who rather lorded it over the others.
""how do you do, madge wildfire?"
said mr. bhaer, as nan came in with the rest to supper.
""give the right hand, little daughter, and mind thy manners," he added, as nan offered him her left.
""the other hurts me."
""the poor little hand!
what has it been doing to get those blisters?"
he asked, drawing it from behind her back, where she had put it with a look which made him think she had been in mischief.
before nan could think of any excuse, daisy burst out with the whole story, during which stuffy tried to hide his face in a bowl of bread and milk.
when the tale was finished, mr. bhaer looked down the long table towards his wife, and said with a laugh in his eyes, "this rather belongs to your side of the house, so i wo n't meddle with it, my dear."
mrs. jo knew what he meant, but she liked her little black sheep all the better for her pluck, though she only said in her soberest way, "do you know why i asked nan to come here?"
""to plague me," muttered stuffy, with his mouth full.
""to help make little gentlemen of you, and i think you have shown that some of you need it."
here stuffy retired into his bowl again, and did not emerge till demi made them all laugh by saying, in his slow wondering way, "how can she, when she's such a tomboy?"
""that's just it, she needs help as much as you, and i expect you set her an example of good manners."
""is she going to be a little gentleman too?"
asked rob.
""she'd like it; would n't you, nan?"
added tommy.
""no, i should n't; i hate boys!"
said nan fiercely, for her hand still smarted, and she began to think that she might have shown her courage in some wiser way.
""i am sorry you hate my boys, because they can be well-mannered, and most agreeable when they choose.
kindness in looks and words and ways is true politeness, and any one can have it if they only try to treat other people as they like to be treated themselves."
mrs. bhaer had addressed herself to nan, but the boys nudged one another, and appeared to take the hint, for that time at least, and passed the butter; said "please," and "thank you," "yes, sir," and "no, ma'am," with unusual elegance and respect.
nan said nothing, but kept herself quiet and refrained from tickling demi, though strongly tempted to do so, because of the dignified airs he put on.
she also appeared to have forgotten her hatred of boys, and played "i spy" with them till dark.
stuffy was observed to offer her frequent sucks on his candy-ball during the game, which evidently sweetened her temper, for the last thing she said on going to bed was, "when my battledore and shuttle-cock comes, i'll let you all play with'em."
her first remark in the morning was "has my box come?"
and when told that it would arrive sometime during the day, she fretted and fumed, and whipped her doll, till daisy was shocked.
she managed to exist, however, till five o'clock, when she disappeared, and was not missed till supper-time, because those at home thought she had gone to the hill with tommy and demi.
""i saw her going down the avenue alone as hard as she could pelt," said mary ann, coming in with the hasty-pudding, and finding every one asking, "where is nan?"
""she has run home, little gypsy!"
cried mrs. bhaer, looking anxious.
""perhaps she has gone to the station to look after her luggage," suggested franz.
""that is impossible, she does not know the way, and if she found it, she could never carry the box a mile," said mrs. bhaer, beginning to think that her new idea might be rather a hard one to carry out.
""it would be like her," and mr. bhaer caught up his hat to go and find the child, when a shout from jack, who was at the window, made everyone hurry to the door.
there was miss nan, to be sure, tugging along a very large band-box tied up in linen bag.
very hot and dusty and tired did she look, but marched stoutly along, and came puffing up to the steps, where she dropped her load with a sigh of relief, and sat down upon it, observed as she crossed her tired arms, "i could n't wait any longer, so i went and got it."
""but you did not know the way," said tommy, while the rest stood round enjoying the joke.
""oh, i found it, i never get lost."
""it's a mile, how could you go so far?"
""well, it was pretty far, but i rested a good deal."
""was n't that thing very heavy?"
""it's so round, i could n't get hold of it good, and i thought my arms would break right off."
""i do n't see how the station-master let you have it," said tommy.
""i did n't say anything to him.
he was in the little ticket place, and did n't see me, so i just took it off the platform."
""run down and tell him it is all right, franz, or old dodd will think it is stolen," said mr. bhaer, joining in the shout of laughter at nan's coolness.
""i told you we would send for it if it did not come.
another time you must wait, for you will get into trouble if you run away.
promise me this, or i shall not dare to trust you out of my sight," said mrs. bhaer, wiping the dust off nan's little hot face.
""well, i wo n't, only papa tells me not to put off doing things, so i do n't."
""that is rather a poser; i think you had better give her some supper now, and a private lecture by and by," said mr. bhaer, too much amused to be angry at the young lady's exploit.
the boys thought it "great fun," and nan entertained them all supper-time with an account of her adventures; for a big dog had barked at her, a man had laughed at her, a woman had given her a doughnut, and her hat had fallen into the brook when she stopped to drink, exhausted with her exertion.
""i fancy you will have your hands full now, my dear; tommy and nan are quite enough for one woman," said mr. bhaer, half an hour later.
""i know it will take some time to tame the child, but she is such a generous, warm-hearted little thing, i should love her even if she were twice as naughty," answered mrs. jo, pointing to the merry group, in the middle of which stood nan, giving away her things right and left, as lavishly as if the big band-box had no bottom.
it was those good traits that soon made little "giddygaddy," as they called her, a favorite with every one.
daisy never complained of being dull again, for nan invented the most delightful plays, and her pranks rivalled tommy's, to the amusement of the whole school.
she buried her big doll and forgot it for a week, and found it well mildewed when she dragged it up.
daisy was in despair, but nan took it to the painter who as at work about the house, got him to paint it brick red, with staring black eyes, then she dressed it up with feathers, and scarlet flannel, and one of ned's leaden hatchets; and in the character of an indian chief, the late poppydilla tomahawked all the other dolls, and caused the nursery to run red with imaginary gore.
she gave away her new shoes to a beggar child, hoping to be allowed to go barefoot, but found it impossible to combine charity and comfort, and was ordered to ask leave before disposing of her clothes.
she delighted the boys by making a fire-ship out of a shingle with two large sails wet with turpentine, which she lighted, and then sent the little vessel floating down the brook at dusk.
she harnessed the old turkey-cock to a straw wagon, and made him trot round the house at a tremendous pace.
she gave her coral necklace for four unhappy kittens, which had been tormented by some heartless lads, and tended them for days as gently as a mother, dressing their wounds with cold cream, feeding them with a doll's spoon, and mourning over them when they died, till she was consoled by one of demi's best turtles.
she made silas tattoo an anchor on her arm like his, and begged hard to have a blue star on each cheek, but he dared not do it, though she coaxed and scolded till the soft-hearted fellow longed to give in.
she rode every animal on the place, from the big horse andy to the cross pig, from whom she was rescued with difficulty.
whatever the boys dared her to do she instantly attempted, no matter how dangerous it might be, and they were never tired of testing her courage.
mr. bhaer suggested that they should see who would study best, and nan found as much pleasure in using her quick wits and fine memory as her active feet and merry tongue, while the lads had to do their best to keep their places, for nan showed them that girls could do most things as well as boys, and some things better.
there were no rewards in school, but mr. bhaer's "well done!"
and mrs. bhaer's good report on the conscience book, taught them to love duty for its own sake, and try to do it faithfully, sure sooner or later the recompense would come.
little nan was quick to feel the new atmosphere, to enjoy it, to show that it was what she needed; for this little garden was full of sweet flowers, half hidden by the weeds; and when kind hands gently began to cultivate it, all sorts of green shoots sprung up, promising to blossom beautifully in the warmth of love and care, the best climate for young hearts and souls all the world over.
chapter viii.
pranks and plays as there is no particular plan to this story, except to describe a few scenes in the life at plumfield for the amusement of certain little persons, we will gently ramble along in this chapter and tell some of the pastimes of mrs. jo's boys.
i beg leave to assure my honored readers that most of the incidents are taken from real life, and that the oddest are the truest; for no person, no matter how vivid an imagination he may have, can invent anything half so droll as the freaks and fancies that originate in the lively brains of little people.
daisy and demi were full of these whims, and lived in a world of their own, peopled with lovely or grotesque creatures, to whom they gave the queerest names, and with whom they played the queerest games.
one of these nursery inventions was an invisible sprite called "the naughty kitty-mouse," whom the children had believed in, feared, and served for a long time.
they seldom spoke of it to any one else, kept their rites as private as possible; and, as they never tried to describe it even to themselves, this being had a vague mysterious charm very agreeable to demi, who delighted in elves and goblins.
a most whimsical and tyrannical imp was the naughty kitty-mouse, and daisy found a fearful pleasure in its service, blindly obeying its most absurd demands, which were usually proclaimed from the lips of demi, whose powers of invention were great.
rob and teddy sometimes joined in these ceremonies, and considered them excellent fun, although they did not understand half that went on.
one day after school demi whispered to his sister, with an ominous wag of the head, "the kitty-mouse wants us this afternoon."
""what for?"
asked daisy, anxiously.
""a sackerryfice," answered demi, solemnly.
""there must be a fire behind the big rock at two o'clock, and we must all bring the things we like best, and burn them!"
he added, with an awful emphasis on the last words.
""oh, dear!
i love the new paper dollies aunt amy painted for me best of any thing; must i burn them up?"
cried daisy, who never thought of denying the unseen tyrant any thing it demanded.
""every one.
i shall burn my boat, my best scrapbook, and all my soldiers," said demi firmly.
""well, i will; but it's too bad of kitty-mouse to want our very nicest things," sighed daisy.
""a sackerryfice means to give up what you are fond of, so we must," explained demi, to whom the new idea had been suggested by hearing uncle fritz describe the customs of the greeks to the big boys who were reading about them in school.
""is rob coming too," asked daisy.
""yes, and he is going to bring his toy village; it is all made of wood, you know, and will burn nicely.
we'll have a grand bonfire, and see them blaze up, wo n't we?"
this brilliant prospect consoled daisy, and she ate her dinner with a row of paper dolls before her, as a sort of farewell banquet.
at the appointed hour the sacrificial train set forth, each child bearing the treasures demanded by the insatiable kitty-mouse.
teddy insisted on going also, and seeing that all the others had toys, he tucked a squeaking lamb under one arm, and old annabella under the other, little dreaming what anguish the latter idol was to give him.
""where are you going, my chickens?"
asked mrs. jo, as the flock passed her door.
""to play by the big rock; ca n't we?"
""yes, only do n't do near the pond, and take good care of baby."
""i always do," said daisy, leading forth her charge with a capable air.
""now, you must all sit round, and not move till i tell you.
this flat stone is an altar, and i am going to make a fire on it."
demi then proceeded to kindle up a small blaze, as he had seen the boys do at picnics.
when the flame burned well, he ordered the company to march round it three times and then stand in a circle.
""i shall begin, and as fast as my things are burnt, you must bring yours."
with that he solemnly laid on a little paper book full of pictures, pasted in by himself; this was followed by a dilapidated boat, and then one by one the unhappy leaden soldiers marched to death.
not one faltered or hung back, from the splendid red and yellow captain to the small drummer who had lost his legs; all vanished in the flames and mingled in one common pool of melted lead.
""now, daisy!"
called the high priest of kitty-mouse, when his rich offerings had been consumed, to the great satisfaction of the children.
""my dear dollies, how can i let them go?"
moaned daisy, hugging the entire dozen with a face full of maternal woe.
""you must," commanded demi; and with a farewell kiss to each, daisy laid her blooming dolls upon the coals.
""let me keep one, the dear blue thing, she is so sweet," besought the poor little mamma, clutching her last in despair.
""more!
more!"
growled an awful voice, and demi cried, "that's the kitty-mouse!
she must have every one, quick, or she will scratch us."
in went the precious blue belle, flounces, rosy hat, and all, and nothing but a few black flakes remained of that bright band.
""stand the houses and trees round, and let them catch themselves; it will be like a real fire then," said demi, who liked variety even in his "sackerryfices."
charmed by this suggestion, the children arranged the doomed village, laid a line of coals along the main street, and then sat down to watch the conflagration.
it was somewhat slow to kindle owing to the paint, but at last one ambitious little cottage blazed up, fired a tree of the palm species, which fell on to the roof of a large family mansion, and in a few minutes the whole town was burning merrily.
the wooden population stood and stared at the destruction like blockheads, as they were, till they also caught and blazed away without a cry.
it took some time to reduce the town to ashes, and the lookers-on enjoyed the spectacle immensely, cheering as each house fell, dancing like wild indians when the steeple flamed aloft, and actually casting one wretched little churn-shaped lady, who had escaped to the suburbs, into the very heart of the fire.
the superb success of this last offering excited teddy to such a degree, that he first threw his lamb into the conflagration, and before it had time even to roast, he planted poor annabella on the funeral pyre.
of course she did not like it, and expressed her anguish and resentment in a way that terrified her infant destroyer.
being covered with kid, she did not blaze, but did what was worse, she squirmed.
first one leg curled up, then the other, in a very awful and lifelike manner; next she flung her arms over her head as if in great agony; her head itself turned on her shoulders, her glass eyes fell out, and with one final writhe of her whole body, she sank down a blackened mass on the ruins of the town.
this unexpected demonstration startled every one and frightened teddy half out of his little wits.
he looked, then screamed and fled toward the house, roaring "marmar" at the top of his voice.
mrs. bhaer heard the outcry and ran to the rescue, but teddy could only cling to her and pour out in his broken way something about "poor bella hurted," "a dreat fire," and "all the dollies dorn."
fearing some dire mishap, his mother caught him up and hurried to the scene of action, where she found the blind worshippers of kitty-mouse mourning over the charred remains of the lost darling.
""what have you been at?
tell me all about it," said mrs. jo, composing herself to listen patiently, for the culprits looked so penitent, she forgave them beforehand.
with some reluctance demi explained their play, and aunt jo laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks, the children were so solemn, and the play was so absurd.
""i thought you were too sensible to play such a silly game as this.
if i had any kitty-mouse i'd have a good one who liked you to play in safe pleasant ways, and not destroy and frighten.
just see what a ruin you have made; all daisy's pretty dolls, demi's soldiers, and rob's new village beside poor teddy's pet lamb, and dear old annabella.
i shall have to write up in the nursery the verse that used to come in the boxes of toys, "the children of holland take pleasure in making, what the children of boston take pleasure in breaking."
""only i shall put plumfield instead of boston."
""we never will again, truly, truly!"
cried the repentant little sinners, much abashed at this reproof.
""demi told us to," said rob.
""well, i heard uncle tell about the greece people, who had altars and things, and so i wanted to be like them, only i had n't any live creatures to sackerryfice, so we burnt up our toys."
""dear me, that is something like the bean story," said aunt jo, laughing again.
""tell about it," suggested daisy, to change the subject.
""once there was a poor woman who had three or four little children, and she used to lock them up in her room when she went out to work, to keep them safe.
on day when she was going away she said, "now, my dears, do n't let baby fall out of window, do n't play with the matches, and do n't put beans up your noses."
now the children had never dreamed of doing that last thing, but she put it into their heads, and the minute she was gone, they ran and stuffed their naughty little noses full of beans, just to see how it felt, and she found them all crying when she came home."
""did it hurt?"
asked rob, with such intense interest that his mother hastily added a warning sequel, lest a new edition of the bean story should appear in her own family.
""very much, as i know, for when my mother told me this story, i was so silly that i went and tried it myself.
i had no beans, so i took some little pebbles, and poked several into my nose.
i did not like it at all, and wanted to take them out again very soon, but one would not come, and i was so ashamed to tell what a goose i been that i went for hours with the stone hurting me very much.
at last the pain got so bad i had to tell, and when my mother could not get it out the doctor came.
then i was put in a chair and held tight, rob, while he used his ugly little pincers till the stone hopped out.
dear me!
how my wretched little nose did ache, and how people laughed at me!"
and mrs. jo shook her head in a dismal way, as if the memory of her sufferings was too much for her.
rob looked deeply impressed and i am glad to say took the warning to heart.
demi proposed that they should bury poor annabella, and in the interest of the funeral teddy forgot his fright.
daisy was soon consoled by another batch of dolls from aunt amy, and the naughty kitty-mouse seemed to be appeased by the last offerings, for she tormented them no more.
""brops" was the name of a new and absorbing play, invented by bangs.
as this interesting animal is not to be found in any zoological garden, unless du chaillu has recently brought one from the wilds of africa, i will mention a few of its peculiar habits and traits, for the benefit of inquiring minds.
the brop is a winged quadruped, with a human face of a youthful and merry aspect.
when it walks the earth it grunts, when it soars it gives a shrill hoot, occasionally it goes erect, and talks good english.
its body is usually covered with a substance much resembling a shawl, sometimes red, sometimes blue, often plaid, and, strange to say, they frequently change skins with one another.
on their heads they have a horn very like a stiff brown paper lamp-lighter.
wings of the same substance flap upon their shoulders when they fly; this is never very far from the ground, as they usually fall with violence if they attempt any lofty flights.
they browse over the earth, but can sit up and eat like the squirrel.
their favorite nourishment is the seed-cake; apples also are freely taken, and sometimes raw carrots are nibbled when food is scarce.
they live in dens, where they have a sort of nest, much like a clothes-basket, in which the little brops play till their wings are grown.
these singular animals quarrel at times, and it is on these occasions that they burst into human speech, call each other names, cry, scold, and sometimes tear off horns and skin, declaring fiercely that they "wo n't play."
the few privileged persons who have studied them are inclined to think them a remarkable mixture of the monkey, the sphinx, the roc, and the queer creatures seen by the famous peter wilkins.
this game was a great favorite, and the younger children beguiled many a rainy afternoon flapping or creeping about the nursery, acting like little bedlamites and being as merry as little grigs.
to be sure, it was rather hard upon clothes, particularly trouser-knees, and jacket-elbows; but mrs. bhaer only said, as she patched and darned, "we do things just as foolish, and not half so harmless.
if i could get as much happiness out of it as the little dears do, i'd be a brop myself."
nat's favorite amusements were working in his garden, and sitting in the willow-tree with his violin, for that green nest was a fairy world to him, and there he loved to perch, making music like a happy bird.
the lads called him "old chirper," because he was always humming, whistling, or fiddling, and they often stopped a minute in their work or play to listen to the soft tones of the violin, which seemed to lead a little orchestra of summer sounds.
the birds appeared to regard him as one of themselves, and fearlessly sat on the fence or lit among the boughs to watch him with their quick bright eyes.
the robins in the apple-tree near by evidently considered him a friend, for the father bird hunted insects close beside him, and the little mother brooded as confidingly over her blue eggs as if the boy was only a new sort of blackbird who cheered her patient watch with his song.
the brown brook babbled and sparkled below him, the bees haunted the clover fields on either side, friendly faces peeped at him as they passed, the old house stretched its wide wings hospitably toward him, and with a blessed sense of rest and love and happiness, nat dreamed for hours in this nook, unconscious what healthful miracles were being wrought upon him.
one listener he had who never tired, and to whom he was more than a mere schoolmate.
poor billy's chief delight was to lie beside the brook, watching leaves and bits of foam dance by, listening dreamily to the music in the willow-tree.
he seemed to think nat a sort of angel who sat aloft and sang, for a few baby memories still lingered in his mind and seemed to grow brighter at these times.
seeing the interest he took in nat, mr. bhaer begged him to help them lift the cloud from the feeble brain by this gentle spell.
glad to do any thing to show his gratitude, nat always smiled on billy when he followed him about, and let him listen undisturbed to the music which seemed to speak a language he could understand.
""help one another," was a favorite plumfield motto, and nat learned how much sweetness is added to life by trying to live up to it.
jack ford's peculiar pastime was buying and selling; and he bid fair to follow in the footsteps of his uncle, a country merchant, who sold a little of every thing and made money fast.
jack had seen the sugar sanded, the molasses watered, the butter mixed with lard, and things of that kind, and labored under the delusion that it was all a proper part of the business.
his stock in trade was of a different sort, but he made as much as he could out of every worm he sold, and always got the best of the bargain when he traded with the boys for string, knives, fish-hooks, or whatever the article might be.
the boys who all had nicknames, called him "skinflint," but jack did not care as long as the old tobacco-pouch in which he kept his money grew heavier and heavier.
he established a sort of auction-room, and now and then sold off all the odds and ends he had collected, or helped the lads exchange things with one another.
he got bats, balls, hockey-sticks, etc., cheap, from one set of mates, furbished them up, and let them for a few cents a time to another set, often extending his business beyond the gates of plumfield in spite of the rules.
mr. bhaer put a stop to some of his speculations, and tried to give him a better idea of business talent than mere sharpness in overreaching his neighbors.
now and then jack made a bad bargain, and felt worse about it than about any failure in lessons or conduct, and took his revenge on the next innocent customer who came along.
his account-book was a curiosity; and his quickness at figures quite remarkable.
mr. bhaer praised him for this, and tried to make his sense of honesty and honor as quick; and, by and by, when jack found that he could not get on without these virtues, he owned that his teacher was right.
cricket and football the boys had of course; but, after the stirring accounts of these games in the immortal "tom brown at rugby," no feeble female pen may venture to do more than respectfully allude to them.
emil spent his holidays on the river or the pond, and drilled the elder lads for a race with certain town boys, who now and then invaded their territory.
the race duly came off, but as it ended in a general shipwreck, it was not mentioned in public; and the commodore had serious thoughts of retiring to a desert island, so disgusted was he with his kind for a time.
no desert island being convenient, he was forced to remain among his friends, and found consolation in building a boat-house.
the little girls indulged in the usual plays of their age, improving upon them somewhat as their lively fancies suggested.
the chief and most absorbing play was called "mrs. shakespeare smith;" the name was provided by aunt jo, but the trials of the poor lady were quite original.
daisy was mrs. s. s., and nan by turns her daughter or a neighbor, mrs. giddygaddy.
no pen can describe the adventures of these ladies, for in one short afternoon their family was the scene of births, marriages, deaths, floods, earthquakes, tea-parties, and balloon ascensions.
millions of miles did these energetic women travel, dressed in hats and habits never seen before by mortal eye, perched on the bed, driving the posts like mettlesome steeds, and bouncing up and down till their heads spun.
fits and fires were the pet afflictions, with a general massacre now and then by way of change.
nan was never tired of inventing fresh combinations, and daisy followed her leader with blind admiration.
poor teddy was a frequent victim, and was often rescued from real danger, for the excited ladies were apt to forget that he was not of the same stuff their longsuffering dolls.
once he was shut into the closet for a dungeon, and forgotten by the girls, who ran off to some out-of-door game.
another time he was half drowned in the bath-tub, playing be a "cunning little whale."
and, worst of all, he was cut down just in time after being hung up for a robber.
but the institution most patronized by all was the club.
it had no other name, and it needed none, being the only one in the neighborhood.
the elder lads got it up, and the younger were occasionally admitted if they behaved well.
tommy and demi were honorary members, but were always obliged to retire unpleasantly early, owing to circumstances over which they had no control.
the proceedings of this club were somewhat peculiar, for it met at all sorts of places and hours, had all manner of queer ceremonies and amusements, and now and then was broken up tempestuously, only to be re-established, however, on a firmer basis.
rainy evenings the members met in the schoolroom, and passed the time in games: chess, morris, backgammon, fencing matches, recitations, debates, or dramatic performances of a darkly tragical nature.
in summer the barn was the rendezvous, and what went on there no uninitiated mortal knows.
on sultry evenings the club adjourned to the brook for aquatic exercises, and the members sat about in airy attire, frog-like and cool.
on such occasions the speeches were unusually eloquent, quite flowing, as one might say; and if any orator's remarks displeased the audience, cold water was thrown upon him till his ardor was effectually quenched.
franz was president, and maintained order admirably, considering the unruly nature of the members.
mr. bhaer never interfered with their affairs, and was rewarded for this wise forbearance by being invited now and then to behold the mysteries unveiled, which he appeared to enjoy much.
when nan came she wished to join the club, and caused great excitement and division among the gentlemen by presenting endless petitions, both written and spoken, disturbing their solemnities by insulting them through the key-hole, performing vigorous solos on the door, and writing up derisive remarks on walls and fences, for she belonged to the "irrepressibles."
finding these appeals in vain, the girls, by the advice of mrs. jo, got up an institution of their own, which they called the cosy club.
to this they magnanimously invited the gentlemen whose youth excluded them from the other one, and entertained these favored beings so well with little suppers, new games devised by nan, and other pleasing festivities, that, one by one, the elder boys confessed a desire to partake of these more elegant enjoyments, and, after much consultation, finally decided to propose an interchange of civilities.
the members of the cosy club were invited to adorn the rival establishment on certain evenings, and to the surprise of the gentlemen their presence was not found to be a restraint upon the conversation or amusement of the regular frequenters; which could not be said of all clubs, i fancy.
the ladies responded handsomely and hospitably to these overtures of peace, and both institutions flourished long and happily.
chapter ix.
daisy's ball "mrs. shakespeare smith would like to have mr. john brooke, mr. thomas bangs, and mr. nathaniel blake to come to her ball at three o'clock today.
""p.s. nat must bring his fiddle, so we can dance, and all the boys must be good, or they can not have any of the nice things we have cooked."
this elegant invitation would, i fear, have been declined, but for the hint given in the last line of the postscript.
""they have been cooking lots of goodies, i smelt'em.
let's go," said tommy.
""we need n't stay after the feast, you know," added demi.
""i never went to a ball.
what do you have to do?"
asked nat.
""oh, we just play be men, and sit round stiff and stupid like grown-up folks, and dance to please the girls.
then we eat up everything, and come away as soon as we can."
""i think i could do that," said nat, after considering tommy's description for a minute.
""i'll write and say we'll come;" and demi despatched the following gentlemanly reply, "we will all come.
please have lots to eat.
j. b. esquire."
great was the anxiety of the ladies about their first ball, because if every thing went well they intended to give a dinner-party to the chosen few.
""aunt jo likes to have the boys play with us, if they are not rough; so we must make them like our balls, then they will do them good," said daisy, with her maternal air, as she set the table and surveyed the store of refreshments with an anxious eye.
""demi and nat will be good, but tommy will do something bad, i know he will," replied nan, shaking her head over the little cake-basket which she was arranging.
""then i shall send him right home," said daisy, with decision.
""people do n't do so at parties, it is n't proper."
""i shall never ask him any more."
""that would do.
he'd be sorry not to come to the dinner-ball, would n't he?"
""i guess he would!
we'll have the splendidest things ever seen, wo n't we?
real soup with a ladle and a tureem -lsb- she meant tureen -rsb- and a little bird for turkey, and gravy, and all kinds of nice vegytubbles."
daisy never could say vegetables properly, and had given up trying.
""it is "most three, and we ought to dress," said nan, who had arranged a fine costume for the occasion, and was anxious to wear it.
""i am the mother, so i sha n't dress up much," said daisy, putting on a night-cap ornamented with a red bow, one of her aunt's long skirts, and a shawl; a pair of spectacles and large pocket handkerchief completed her toilette, making a plump, rosy little matron of her.
nan had a wreath of artificial flowers, a pair of old pink slippers, a yellow scarf, a green muslin skirt, and a fan made of feathers from the duster; also, as a last touch of elegance, a smelling-bottle without any smell in it.
""i am the daughter, so i rig up a good deal, and i must sing and dance, and talk more than you do.
the mothers only get the tea and be proper, you know."
a sudden very loud knock caused miss smith to fly into a chair, and fan herself violently, while her mamma sat bolt upright on the sofa, and tried to look quite calm and "proper."
little bess, who was on a visit, acted the part of maid, and opened the door, saying with a smile, "wart in, gemplemun; it's all weady."
in honor of the occasion, the boys wore high paper collars, tall black hats, and gloves of every color and material, for they were an afterthought, and not a boy among them had a perfect pair.
""good day, mum," said demi, in a deep voice, which was so hard to keep up that his remarks had to be extremely brief.
every one shook hands and then sat down, looking so funny, yet so sober, that the gentlemen forgot their manners, and rolled in their chairs with laughter.
""oh, do n't!"
cried mrs. smith, much distressed.
""you ca n't ever come again if you act so," added miss smith, rapping mr. bangs with her bottle because he laughed loudest.
""i ca n't help it, you look so like fury," gasped mr. bangs, with most uncourteous candor.
""so do you, but i should n't be so rude as to say so.
he sha n't come to the dinner-ball, shall he, daisy?"
cried nan, indignantly.
""i think we had better dance now.
did you bring your fiddle, sir?"
asked mrs. smith, trying to preserve her polite composure.
""it is outside the door," and nat went to get it.
""better have tea first," proposed the unabashed tommy, winking openly at demi to remind him that the sooner the refreshments were secured, the sooner they could escape.
""no, we never have supper first; and if you do n't dance well you wo n't have any supper at all, not one bit, sir," said mrs. smith, so sternly that her wild guests saw she was not to be trifled with, and grew overwhelmingly civil all at once.
""i will take mr. bangs and teach him the polka, for he does not know it fit to be seen," added the hostess, with a reproachful look that sobered tommy at once.
nat struck up, and the ball opened with two couples, who went conscientiously through a somewhat varied dance.
the ladies did well, because they liked it, but the gentlemen exerted themselves from more selfish motives, for each felt that he must earn his supper, and labored manfully toward that end.
when every one was out of breath they were allowed to rest; and, indeed, poor mrs. smith needed it, for her long dress had tripped her up many times.
the little maid passed round molasses and water in such small cups that one guest actually emptied nine.
i refrain from mentioning his name, because this mild beverage affected him so much that he put cup and all into his mouth at the ninth round, and choked himself publicly.
""you must ask nan to play and sing now," said daisy to her brother, who sat looking very much like an owl, as he gravely regarded the festive scene between his high collars.
""give us a song, mum," said the obedient guest, secretly wondering where the piano was.
miss smith sailed up to an old secretary which stood in the room, threw back the lid of the writing-desk, and sitting down before it, accompanied herself with a vigor which made the old desk rattle as she sang that new and lovely song, beginning "gaily the troubadour touched his guitar, as he was hastening home from the war."
the gentlemen applauded so enthusiastically that she gave them "bounding billows," "little bo-peep," and other gems of song, till they were obliged to hint that they had had enough.
grateful for the praises bestowed upon her daughter, mrs. smith graciously announced, "now we will have tea.
sit down carefully, and do n't grab."
it was beautiful to see the air of pride with which the good lady did the honors of her table, and the calmness with which she bore the little mishaps that occurred.
the best pie flew wildly on the floor when she tried to cut it with a very dull knife; the bread and butter vanished with a rapidity calculated to dismay a housekeeper's soul; and, worst of all, the custards were so soft that they had to be drunk up, instead of being eaten elegantly with the new tin spoons.
i grieve to state that miss smith squabbled with the maid for the best jumble, which caused bess to toss the whole dish into the air, and burst out crying amid a rain of falling cakes.
she was comforted by a seat at the table, and the sugar-bowl to empty; but during this flurry a large plate of patties was mysteriously lost, and could not be found.
they were the chief ornament of the feast, and mrs. smith was indignant at the loss, for she had made them herself, and they were beautiful to behold.
i put it to any lady if it was not hard to have one dozen delicious patties -lrb- made of flour, salt, and water, with a large raisin in the middle of each, and much sugar over the whole -rrb- swept away at one fell swoop?
""you hid them, tommy; i know you did!"
cried the outraged hostess, threatening her suspected guest with the milk-pot.
""i did n't!"
""you did!"
""it is n't proper to contradict," said nan, who was hastily eating up the jelly during the fray.
""give them back, demi," said tommy.
""that's a fib, you've got them in your own pocket," bawled demi, roused by the false accusation.
""let's take'em away from him.
it's too bad to make daisy cry," suggested nat, who found his first ball more exciting than he expected.
daisy was already weeping, bess like a devoted servant mingled her tears with those of her mistress, and nan denounced the entire race of boys as "plaguey things."
meanwhile the battle raged among the gentlemen, for, when the two defenders of innocence fell upon the foe, that hardened youth intrenched himself behind a table and pelted them with the stolen tarts, which were very effective missiles, being nearly as hard as bullets.
while his ammunition held out the besieged prospered, but the moment the last patty flew over the parapet, the villain was seized, dragged howling from the room, and cast upon the hall floor in an ignominious heap.
the conquerors then returned flushed with victory, and while demi consoled poor mrs. smith, nat and nan collected the scattered tarts, replaced each raisin in its proper bed, and rearranged the dish so that it really looked almost as well as ever.
but their glory had departed, for the sugar was gone, and no one cared to eat them after the insult offered to them.
""i guess we had better go," said demi, suddenly, as aunt jo's voice was heard on the stairs.
""p "r "aps we had," and nat hastily dropped a stray jumble that he had just picked up.
but mrs. jo was among them before the retreat was accomplished, and into her sympathetic ear the young ladies poured the story of their woes.
""no more balls for these boys till they have atoned for this bad behavior by doing something kind to you," said mrs. jo, shaking her head at the three culprits.
""we were only in fun," began demi.
""i do n't like fun that makes other people unhappy.
i am disappointed in you, demi, for i hoped you would never learn to tease daisy.
such a kind little sister as she is to you."
""boys always tease their sisters; tom says so," muttered demi.
""i do n't intend that my boys shall, and i must send daisy home if you can not play happily together," said aunt jo, soberly.
at this awful threat, demi sidled up to his sister, and daisy hastily dried her tears, for to be separated was the worst misfortune that could happen to the twins.
""nat was bad, too, and tommy was baddest of all," observed nan, fearing that two of the sinners would not get their fair share of punishment.
""i am sorry," said nat, much ashamed.
""i ai n't!"
bawled tommy through the keyhole, where he was listening with all his might.
mrs. jo wanted very much to laugh, but kept her countenance, and said impressively, as she pointed to the door, "you can go, boys, but remember, you are not to speak to or play with the little girls till i give you leave.
you do n't deserve the pleasure, so i forbid it."
the ill-mannered young gentlemen hastily retired, to be received outside with derision and scorn by the unrepentant bangs, who would not associate with them for at least fifteen minutes.
daisy was soon consoled for the failure of her ball, but lamented the edict that parted her from her brother, and mourned over his short-comings in her tender little heart.
nan rather enjoyed the trouble, and went about turning up her pug nose at the three, especially tommy, who pretended not to care, and loudly proclaimed his satisfaction at being rid of those "stupid girls."
but in his secret soul he soon repented of the rash act that caused this banishment from the society he loved, and every hour of separation taught him the value of the "stupid girls."
the others gave in very soon, and longed to be friends, for now there was no daisy to pet and cook for them; no nan to amuse and doctor them; and, worst of all, no mrs. jo to make home life pleasant and life easy for them.
to their great affliction, mrs. jo seemed to consider herself one of the offended girls, for she hardly spoke to the outcasts, looked as if she did not see them when she passed, and was always too busy now to attend to their requests.
this sudden and entire exile from favor cast a gloom over their souls, for when mother bhaer deserted them, their sun had set at noon-day, as it were, and they had no refuge left.
this unnatural state of things actually lasted for three days, then they could bear it no longer, and fearing that the eclipse might become total, went to mr. bhaer for help and counsel.
it is my private opinion that he had received instructions how to behave if the case should be laid before him.
but no one suspected it, and he gave the afflicted boys some advice, which they gratefully accepted and carried out in the following manner: secluding themselves in the garret, they devoted several play-hours to the manufacture of some mysterious machine, which took so much paste that asia grumbled, and the little girls wondered mightily.
nan nearly got her inquisitive nose pinched in the door, trying to see what was going on, and daisy sat about, openly lamenting that they could not all play nicely together, and not have any dreadful secrets.
wednesday afternoon was fine, and after a good deal of consultation about wind and weather, nat and tommy went off, bearing an immense flat parcel hidden under many newspapers.
nan nearly died with suppressed curiosity, daisy nearly cried with vexation, and both quite trembled with interest when demi marched into mrs. bhaer's room, hat in hand, and said, in the politest tone possible to a mortal boy of his years, "please, aunt jo, would you and the girls come out to a surprise party we have made for you?
do it's a very nice one."
""thank you, we will come with pleasure; only, i must take teddy with me," replied mrs. bhaer, with a smile that cheered demi like sunshine after rain.
""we'd like to have him.
the little wagon is all ready for the girls; you wo n't mind walking just up to pennyroyal hill, will you aunty?"
""i should like it exceedingly; but are you quite sure i shall not be in the way?"
""oh, no, indeed!
we want you very much; and the party will be spoilt if you do n't come," cried demi, with great earnestness.
""thank you kindly, sir;" and aunt jo made him a grand curtsey, for she liked frolics as well as any of them.
""now, young ladies, we must not keep them waiting; on with the hats, and let us be off at once.
i'm all impatience to know what the surprise is."
as mrs. bhaer spoke every one bustled about, and in five minutes the three little girls and teddy were packed into the "clothes-basket," as they called the wicker wagon which toby drew.
demi walked at the head of the procession, and mrs. jo brought up the rear, escorted by kit.
it was a most imposing party, i assure you, for toby had a red feather-duster in his head, two remarkable flags waved over the carriage, kit had a blue bow on his neck, which nearly drove him wild, demi wore a nosegay of dandelions in his buttonhole, and mrs. jo carried the queer japanese umbrella in honor of the occasion.
the girls had little flutters of excitement all the way; and teddy was so charmed with the drive that he kept dropping his hat overboard, and when it was taken from him he prepared to tumble out himself, evidently feeling that it behooved him to do something for the amusement of the party.
when they came to the hill "nothing was to be seen but the grass blowing in the wind," as the fairy books say, and the children looked disappointed.
but demi said, in his most impressive manner, "now, you all get out and stand still, and the surprise party with come in;" with which remark he retired behind a rock, over which heads had been bobbing at intervals for the last half-hour.
a short pause of intense suspense, and then nat, demi, and tommy marched forth, each bearing a new kite, which they presented to the three young ladies.
shrieks of delight arose, but were silenced by the boys, who said, with faces brimful of merriment, "that is n't all the surprise;" and, running behind the rock, again emerged bearing a fourth kite of superb size, on which was printed, in bright yellow letters, "for mother bhaer."
""we thought you'd like one, too, because you were angry with us, and took the girls" part," cried all three, shaking with laughter, for this part of the affair evidently was a surprise to mrs. jo.
she clapped her hands, and joined in the laugh, looking thoroughly tickled at the joke.
""now, boys, that is regularly splendid!
who did think of it?"
she asked, receiving the monster kite with as much pleasure as the little girls did theirs.
""uncle fritz proposed it when we planned to make the others; he said you'd like it, so we made a bouncer," answered demi, beaming with satisfaction at the success of the plot.
""uncle fritz knows what i like.
yes, these are magnificent kites, and we were wishing we had some the other day when you were flying yours, were n't we, girls?"
""that's why we made them for you," cried tommy, standing on his head as the most appropriate way of expressing his emotions.
""let us fly them," said energetic nan.
""i do n't know how," began daisy.
""we'll show you, we want to!"
cried all the boys in a burst of devotion, as demi took daisy's, tommy nan's, and nat, with difficulty, persuaded bess to let go her little blue one.
""aunty, if you will wait a minute, we'll pitch yours for you," said demi, feeling that mrs. bhaer's favor must not be lost again by any neglect of theirs.
""bless your buttons, dear, i know all about it; and here is a boy who will toss up for me," added mrs. jo, as the professor peeped over the rock with a face full of fun.
he came out at once, tossed up the big kite, and mrs. jo ran off with it in fine style, while the children stood and enjoyed the spectacle.
one by one all the kites went up, and floated far overhead like gay birds, balancing themselves on the fresh breeze that blew steadily over the hill.
such a merry time as they had!
running and shouting, sending up the kites or pulling them down, watching their antics in the air, and feeling them tug at the string like live creatures trying to escape.
nan was quite wild with the fun, daisy thought the new play nearly as interesting as dolls, and little bess was so fond of her "boo tite," that she would only let it go on very short flights, preferring to hold it in her lap and look at the remarkable pictures painted on it by tommy's dashing brush.
mrs. jo enjoyed hers immensely, and it acted as if it knew who owned it, for it came tumbling down head first when least expected, caught on trees, nearly pitched into the river, and finally darted away to such a height that it looked a mere speck among the clouds.
by and by every one got tired, and fastening the kite-strings to trees and fences, all sat down to rest, except mr. bhaer, who went off to look at the cows, with teddy on his shoulder.
""did you ever have such a good time as this before?"
asked nat, as they lay about on the grass, nibbling pennyroyal like a flock of sheep.
""not since i last flew a kite, years ago, when i was a girl," answered mrs. jo.
""i'd like to have known you when you were a girl, you must have been so jolly," said nat.
""i was a naughty little girl, i am sorry to say."
""i like naughty little girls," observed tommy, looking at nan, who made a frightful grimace at him in return for the compliment.
""why do n't i remember you then, aunty?
was i too young?"
asked demi.
""rather, dear."
""i suppose my memory had n't come then.
grandpa says that different parts of the mind unfold as we grow up, and the memory part of my mind had n't unfolded when you were little, so i ca n't remember how you looked," explained demi.
""now, little socrates, you had better keep that question for grandpa, it is beyond me," said aunt jo, putting on the extinguisher.
""well, i will, he knows about those things, and you do n't," returned demi, feeling that on the whole kites were better adapted to the comprehension of the present company.
""tell about the last time you flew a kite," said nat, for mrs. jo had laughed as she spoke of it, and he thought it might be interesting.
""oh, it was only rather funny, for i was a great girl of fifteen, and was ashamed to be seen at such a play.
so uncle teddy and i privately made our kites, and stole away to fly them.
we had a capital time, and were resting as we are now, when suddenly we heard voices, and saw a party of young ladies and gentlemen coming back from a picnic.
teddy did not mind, though he was rather a large boy to be playing with a kite, but i was in a great flurry, for i knew i should be sadly laughed at, and never hear the last of it, because my wild ways amused the neighbors as much as nan's do us."
"what shall i do?"
i whispered to teddy, as the voices drew nearer and nearer."
"i'll show you," he said, and whipping out his knife he cut the strings.
away flew the kites, and when the people came up we were picking flowers as properly as you please.
they never suspected us, and we had a grand laugh over our narrow escape."
""were the kites lost, aunty?"
asked daisy.
""quite lost, but i did not care, for i made up my mind that it would be best to wait till i was an old lady before i played with kites again; and you see i have waited," said mrs. jo, beginning to pull in the big kite, for it was getting late.
""must we go now?"
""i must, or you wo n't have any supper; and that sort of surprise party would not suit you, i think, my chickens."
""has n't our party been a nice one?"
asked tommy, complacently.
""splendid!"
answered every one.
""do you know why?
it is because your guests have behaved themselves, and tried to make everything go well.
you understand what i mean, do n't you?"
""yes'm," was all the boys said, but they stole a shamefaced look at one another, as they meekly shouldered their kites and walked home, thinking of another party where the guests had not behaved themselves, and things had gone badly on account of it.
chapter x. home again july had come, and haying begun; the little gardens were doing finely and the long summer days were full of pleasant hours.
the house stood open from morning till night, and the lads lived out of doors, except at school time.
the lessons were short, and there were many holidays, for the bhaers believed in cultivating healthy bodies by much exercise, and our short summers are best used in out-of-door work.
such a rosy, sunburnt, hearty set as the boys became; such appetites as they had; such sturdy arms and legs, as outgrew jackets and trousers; such laughing and racing all over the place; such antics in house and barn; such adventures in the tramps over hill and dale; and such satisfaction in the hearts of the worthy bhaers, as they saw their flock prospering in mind and body, i can not begin to describe.
only one thing was needed to make them quite happy, and it came when they least expected it.
one balmy night when the little lads were in bed, the elder ones bathing down at the brook, and mrs. bhaer undressing teddy in her parlor, he suddenly cried out, "oh, my danny!"
and pointed to the window, where the moon shone brightly.
""no, lovey, he is not there, it was the pretty moon," said his mother.
""no, no, danny at a window; teddy saw him," persisted baby, much excited.
""it might have been," and mrs. bhaer hurried to the window, hoping it would prove true.
but the face was gone, and nowhere appeared any signs of a mortal boy; she called his name, ran to the front door with teddy in his little shirt, and made him call too, thinking the baby voice might have more effect than her own.
no one answered, nothing appeared, and they went back much disappointed.
teddy would not be satisfied with the moon, and after he was in his crib kept popping up his head to ask if danny was not "tummin" soon."
by and by he fell asleep, the lads trooped up to bed, the house grew still, and nothing but the chirp of the crickets broke the soft silence of the summer night.
mrs. bhaer sat sewing, for the big basket was always piled with socks, full of portentous holes, and thinking of the lost boy.
she had decided that baby had been mistaken, and did not even disturb mr. bhaer by telling him of the child's fancy, for the poor man got little time to himself till the boys were abed, and he was busy writing letters.
it was past ten when she rose to shut up the house.
as she paused a minute to enjoy the lovely scene from the steps, something white caught her eye on one of the hay-cocks scattered over the lawn.
the children had been playing there all the afternoon, and, fancying that nan had left her hat as usual, mrs. bhaer went out to get it.
but as she approached, she saw that it was neither hat nor handkerchief, but a shirt sleeve with a brown hand sticking out of it.
she hurried round the hay-cock, and there lay dan, fast asleep.
ragged, dirty, thin, and worn-out he looked; one foot was bare, the other tied up in the old gingham jacket which he had taken from his own back to use as a clumsy bandage for some hurt.
he seemed to have hidden himself behind the hay-cock, but in his sleep had thrown out the arm that had betrayed him.
he sighed and muttered as if his dreams disturbed him, and once when he moved, he groaned as if in pain, but still slept on quite spent with weariness.
""he must not lie here," said mrs. bhaer, and stooping over him she gently called his name.
he opened his eyes and looked at her, as if she was a part of his dream, for he smiled and said drowsily, "mother bhaer, i've come home."
the look, the words, touched her very much, and she put her hand under his head to lift him up, saying in her cordial way, "i thought you would, and i'm so glad to see you, dan."
he seemed to wake thoroughly then, and started up looking about him as if he suddenly remembered where he was, and doubted even that kind welcome.
his face changed, and he said in his old rough way, "i was going off in the morning.
i only stopped to peek in, as i went by."
""but why not come in, dan?
did n't you hear us call you?
teddy saw, and cried for you."
""did n't suppose you'd let me in," he said, fumbling with a little bundle which he had taken up as if going immediately.
""try and see," was all mrs. bhaer answered, holding out her hand and pointing to the door, where the light shone hospitably.
with a long breath, as if a load was off his mind, dan took up a stout stick, and began to limp towards the house, but stopped suddenly, to say inquiringly, "mr. bhaer wo n't like it.
i ran away from page."
""he knows it, and was sorry, but it will make no difference.
are you lame?"
asked mrs. jo, as he limped on again.
""getting over a wall a stone fell on my foot and smashed it.
i do n't mind," and he did his best to hide the pain each step cost him.
mrs. bhaer helped him into her own room, and, once there, he dropped into a chair, and laid his head back, white and faint with weariness and suffering.
""my poor dan!
drink this, and then eat a little; you are at home now, and mother bhaer will take good care of you."
he only looked up at her with eyes full of gratitude, as he drank the wine she held to his lips, and then began slowly to eat the food she brought him.
each mouthful seemed to put heart into him, and presently he began to talk as if anxious to have her know all about him.
""where have you been, dan?"
she asked, beginning to get out some bandages.
""i ran off more'n a month ago.
page was good enough, but too strict.
i did n't like it, so i cut away down the river with a man who was going in his boat.
that's why they could n't tell where i'd gone.
when i left the man, i worked for a couple of weeks with a farmer, but i thrashed his boy, and then the old man thrashed me, and i ran off again and walked here."
""all the way?"
""yes, the man did n't pay me, and i would n't ask for it.
took it out in beating the boy," and dan laughed, yet looked ashamed, as he glanced at his ragged clothes and dirty hands.
""how did you live?
it was a long, long tramp for a boy like you."
""oh, i got on well enough, till i hurt my foot.
folks gave me things to eat, and i slept in barns and tramped by day.
i got lost trying to make a short cut, or i'd have been here sooner."
""but if you did not mean to come in and stay with us, what were you going to do?"
""i thought i'd like to see teddy again, and you; and then i was going back to my old work in the city, only i was so tired i went to sleep on the hay.
i'd have been gone in the morning, if you had n't found me."
""are you sorry i did?"
and mrs. jo looked at him with a half merry, half reproachful look, as she knelt down to look at his wounded foot.
the color came up into dan's face, and he kept his eyes fixed on his plate, as he said very low, "no, ma'am, i'm glad, i wanted to stay, but i was afraid you --" he did not finish, for mrs. bhaer interrupted him by an exclamation of pity, as she saw his foot, for it was seriously hurt.
""when did you do it?"
""three days ago."
""and you have walked on it in this state?"
""i had a stick, and i washed it at every brook i came to, and one woman gave me a rag to put on it."
""mr. bhaer must see and dress it at once," and mrs. jo hastened into the next room, leaving the door ajar behind her, so that dan heard all that passed.
""fritz, the boy has come back."
""who?
dan?"
""yes, teddy saw him at the window, and he called to him, but he went away and hid behind the hay-cocks on the lawn.
i found him there just now fast asleep, and half dead with weariness and pain.
he ran away from page a month ago, and has been making his way to us ever since.
he pretends that he did not mean to let us see him, but go on to the city, and his old work, after a look at us.
it is evident, however, that the hope of being taken in has led him here through every thing, and there he is waiting to know if you will forgive and take him back."
""did he say so?"
""his eyes did, and when i waked him, he said, like a lost child, "mother bhaer, i've come home."
i had n't the heart to scold him, and just took him in like a poor little black sheep come back to the fold.
i may keep him, fritz?"
""of course you may!
this proves to me that we have a hold on the boy's heart, and i would no more send him away now than i would my own rob."
dan heard a soft little sound, as if mrs. jo thanked her husband without words, and, in the instant's silence that followed, two great tears that had slowly gathered in the boy's eyes brimmed over and rolled down his dusty cheeks.
no one saw them, for he brushed them hastily away; but in that little pause i think dan's old distrust for these good people vanished for ever, the soft spot in his heart was touched, and he felt an impetuous desire to prove himself worthy of the love and pity that was so patient and forgiving.
he said nothing, he only wished the wish with all his might, resolved to try in his blind boyish way, and sealed his resolution with the tears which neither pain, fatigue, nor loneliness could wring from him.
""come and see his foot.
i am afraid it is badly hurt, for he has kept on three days through heat and dust, with nothing but water and an old jacket to bind it up with.
i tell you, fritz, that boy is a brave lad, and will make a fine man yet."
""i hope so, for your sake, enthusiastic woman, your faith deserves success.
now, i will go and see your little spartan.
where is he?"
""in my room; but, dear, you'll be very kind to him, no matter how gruff he seems.
i am sure that is the way to conquer him.
he wo n't bear sternness nor much restraint, but a soft word and infinite patience will lead him as it used to lead me."
""as if you ever like this little rascal!"
cried mr. bhaer, laughing, yet half angry at the idea.
""i was in spirit, though i showed it in a different way.
i seem to know by instinct how he feels, to understand what will win and touch him, and to sympathize with his temptations and faults.
i am glad i do, for it will help me to help him; and if i can make a good man of this wild boy, it will be the best work of my life."
""god bless the work, and help the worker!"
mr. bhaer spoke now as earnestly as she had done, and both came in together to find dan's head down upon his arm, as if he was quite overcome by sleep.
but he looked up quickly, and tried to rise as mr. bhaer said pleasantly, "so you like plumfield better than page's farm.
well, let us see if we can get on more comfortably this time than we did before."
""thanky, sir," said dan, trying not to be gruff, and finding it easier than he expected.
""now, the foot!
ach!
this is not well.
we must have dr. firth to-morrow.
warm water, jo, and old linen."
mr. bhaer bathed and bound up the wounded foot, while mrs. jo prepared the only empty bed in the house.
it was in the little guest-chamber leading from the parlor, and often used when the lads were poorly, for it saved mrs. jo from running up and down, and the invalids could see what was going on.
when it was ready, mr. bhaer took the boy in his arms, and carried him in, helped him undress, laid him on the little white bed, and left him with another hand-shake, and a fatherly "good-night, my son."
dan dropped asleep at once, and slept heavily for several hours; then his foot began to throb and ache, and he awoke to toss about uneasily, trying not to groan lest any one should hear him, for he was a brave lad, and did bear pain like "a little spartan," as mr. bhaer called him.
mrs. jo had a way of flitting about the house at night, to shut the windows if the wind grew chilly, to draw mosquito curtains over teddy, or look after tommy, who occasionally walked in his sleep.
the least noise waked her, and as she often heard imaginary robbers, cats, and conflagrations, the doors stood open all about, so her quick ear caught the sound of dan's little moans, and she was up in a minute.
he was just giving his hot pillow a despairing thump when a light came glimmering through the hall, and mrs. jo crept in, looking like a droll ghost, with her hair in a great knob on the top of her head, and a long gray dressing-gown trailing behind her.
""are you in pain, dan?"
""it's pretty bad; but i did n't mean to wake you."
""i'm a sort of owl, always flying about at night.
yes, your foot is like fire; the bandages must be wet again," and away flapped the maternal owl for more cooling stuff, and a great mug of ice water.
""oh, that's so nice!"
sighed dan, the wet bandages went on again, and a long draught of water cooled his thirsty throat.
""there, now, sleep your best, and do n't be frightened if you see me again, for i'll slip down by and by, and give you another sprinkle."
as she spoke, mrs. jo stooped to turn the pillow and smooth the bed-clothes, when, to her great surprise, dan put his arm around her neck, drew her face down to his, and kissed her, with a broken "thank you, ma'am," which said more than the most eloquent speech could have done; for the hasty kiss, the muttered words, meant, "i'm sorry, i will try."
she understood it, accepted the unspoken confession, and did not spoil it by any token of surprise.
she only remembered that he had no mother, kissed the brown cheek half hidden on the pillow, as if ashamed of the little touch of tenderness, and left him, saying, what he long remembered, "you are my boy now, and if you choose you can make me proud and glad to say so."
once again, just at dawn, she stole down to find him so fast asleep that he did not wake, and showed no sign of consciousness as she wet his foot, except that the lines of pain smoothed themselves away, and left his face quite peaceful.
the day was sunday, and the house so still that he never waked till near noon, and, looking round him, saw an eager little face peering in at the door.
he held out his arms, and teddy tore across the room to cast himself bodily upon the bed, shouting, "my danny's tum!"
as he hugged and wriggled with delight.
mrs. bhaer appeared next, bringing breakfast, and never seeming to see how shamefaced dan looked at the memory of the little scene last night.
teddy insisted on giving him his "betfus," and fed him like a baby, which, as he was not very hungry, dan enjoyed very much.
then came the doctor, and the poor spartan had a bad time of it, for some of the little bones in his foot were injured, and putting them to rights was such a painful job, that dan's lips were white, and great drops stood on his forehead, though he never cried out, and only held mrs. jo's hand so tight that it was red long afterwards.
""you must keep this boy quiet, for a week at least, and not let him put his foot to the ground.
by that time, i shall know whether he may hop a little with a crutch, or stick to his bed for a while longer," said dr. firth, putting up the shining instruments that dan did not like to see.
""it will get well sometime, wo n't it?"
he asked, looking alarmed at the word "crutches."
""i hope so;" and with that the doctor departed, leaving dan much depressed; for the loss of a foot is a dreadful calamity to an active boy.
""do n't be troubled, i am a famous nurse, and we will have you tramping about as well as ever in a month," said mrs. jo, taking a hopeful view of the case.
but the fear of being lame haunted dan, and even teddy's caresses did not cheer him; so mrs. jo proposed that one or two of the boys should come in and pay him a little visit, and asked whom he would like to see.
""nat and demi; i'd like my hat too, there's something in it i guess they'd like to see.
i suppose you threw away my bundle of plunder?"
said dan, looking rather anxious as he put the question.
""no, i kept it, for i thought they must be treasures of some kind, you took such care of them;" and mrs. jo brought him his old straw hat stuck full of butterflies and beetles, and a handkerchief containing a collection of odd things picked up on his way: birds" eggs, carefully done up in moss, curious shells and stones, bits of fungus, and several little crabs, in a state of great indignation at their imprisonment.
""could i have something to put these fellers in?
mr. hyde and i found'em, and they are first-rate ones, so i'd like to keep and watch'em; can i?"
asked dan, forgetting his foot, and laughing to see the crabs go sidling and backing over the bed.
""of course you can; polly's old cage will be just the thing.
do n't let them nip teddy's toes while i get it;" and away went mrs. jo, leaving dan overjoyed to find that his treasures were not considered rubbish, and thrown away.
nat, demi, and the cage arrived together, and the crabs were settled in their new house, to the great delight of the boys, who, in the excitement of the performance, forgot any awkwardness they might otherwise have felt in greeting the runaway.
to these admiring listeners dan related his adventures much more fully than he had done to the bhaers.
then he displayed his "plunder," and described each article so well, that mrs. jo, who had retired to the next room to leave them free, was surprised and interested, as well as amused, at their boyish chatter.
""how much the lad knows of these things!
how absorbed he is in them!
and what a mercy it is just now, for he cares so little for books, it would be hard to amuse him while he is laid up; but the boys can supply him with beetles and stones to any extent, and i am glad to find out this taste of his; it is a good one, and may perhaps prove the making of him.
if he should turn out a great naturalist, and nat a musician, i should have cause to be proud of this year's work;" and mrs. jo sat smiling over her book as she built castles in the air, just as she used to do when a girl, only then they were for herself, and now they were for other people, which is the reason perhaps that some of them came to pass in reality for charity is an excellent foundation to build anything upon.
nat was most interested in the adventures, but demi enjoyed the beetles and butterflies immensely, drinking in the history of their changeful little lives as if it were a new and lovely sort of fairy tale for, even in his plain way, dan told it well, and found great satisfaction in the thought that here at least the small philosopher could learn of him.
so interested were they in the account of catching a musk rat, whose skin was among the treasures, that mr. bhaer had to come himself to tell nat and demi it was time for the walk.
dan looked so wistfully after them as they ran off that father bhaer proposed carrying him to the sofa in the parlor for a little change of air and scene.
when he was established, and the house quiet, mrs. jo, who sat near by showing teddy pictures, said, in an interested tone, as she nodded towards the treasures still in dan's hands, "where did you learn so much about these things?"
""i always liked'em, but did n't know much till mr. hyde told me."
""oh, he was a man who lived round in the woods studying these things i do n't know what you call him and wrote about frogs, and fishes, and so on.
he stayed at page's, and used to want me to go and help him, and it was great fun,'cause he told me ever so much, and was uncommon jolly and wise.
hope i'll see him again sometime."
""i hope you will," said mrs. jo, for dan's face had brightened up, and he was so interested in the matter that he forgot his usual taciturnity.
""why, he could make birds come to him, and rabbits and squirrels did n't mind him any more than if he was a tree.
did you ever tickle a lizard with a straw?"
asked dan, eagerly.
""no, but i should like to try it."
""well, i've done it, and it's so funny to see'em turn over and stretch out, they like it so much.
mr. hyde used to do it; and he'd make snakes listen to him while he whistled, and he knew just when certain flowers would blow, and bees would n't sting him, and he'd tell the wonderfullest things about fish and flies, and the indians and the rocks."
""i think you were so fond of going with mr. hyde, you rather neglected mr. page," said mrs. jo, slyly.
""yes, i did; i hated to have to weed and hoe when i might be tramping round with mr. hyde.
page thought such things silly, and called mr. hyde crazy because he'd lay hours watching a trout or a bird."
""suppose you say lie instead of lay, it is better grammar," said mrs. jo, very gently; and then added, "yes, page is a thorough farmer, and would not understand that a naturalist's work was just as interesting, and perhaps just as important as his own.
now, dan, if you really love these things, as i think you do, and i am glad to see it, you shall have time to study them and books to help you; but i want you to do something besides, and to do it faithfully, else you will be sorry by and by, and find that you have got to begin again."
""yes, ma'am," said dan, meekly, and looked a little scared by the serious tone of the last remarks, for he hated books, yet had evidently made up his mind to study anything she proposed.
""do you see that cabinet with twelve drawers in it?"
was the next very unexpected question.
dan did see two tall old-fashioned ones standing on either side of the piano; he knew them well, and had often seen nice bits of string, nails, brown paper, and such useful matters come out of the various drawers.
he nodded and smiled.
mrs. jo went on, "well, do n't you think those drawers would be good places to put your eggs, and stones, and shells, and lichens?"
""oh, splendid, but you would n't like my things "clutterin" round," as mr. page used to say, would you?"
cried dan, sitting up to survey the old piece of furniture with sparkling eyes.
""i like litter of that sort; and if i did n't, i should give you the drawers, because i have a regard for children's little treasures, and i think they should be treated respectfully.
now, i am going to make a bargain with you, dan, and i hope you will keep it honorably.
here are twelve good-sized drawers, one for each month of the year, and they shall be yours as fast as you earn them, by doing the little duties that belong to you.
i believe in rewards of a certain kind, especially for young folks; they help us along, and though we may begin by being good for the sake of the reward, if it is rightly used, we shall soon learn to love goodness for itself."
""do you have'em?"
asked dan, looking as if this was new talk for him.
""yes, indeed!
i have n't learnt to get on without them yet.
my rewards are not drawers, or presents, or holidays, but they are things which i like as much as you do the others.
the good behavior and success of my boys is one of the rewards i love best, and i work for it as i want you to work for your cabinet.
do what you dislike, and do it well, and you get two rewards, one, the prize you see and hold; the other, the satisfaction of a duty cheerfully performed.
do you understand that?"
""yes, ma'am."
""we all need these little helps; so you shall try to do your lessons and your work, play kindly with all the boys, and use your holidays well; and if you bring me a good report, or if i see and know it without words for i'm quick to spy out the good little efforts of my boys you shall have a compartment in the drawer for your treasures.
see, some are already divided into four parts, and i will have the others made in the same way, a place for each week; and when the drawer is filled with curious and pretty things, i shall be as proud of it as you are; prouder, i think for in the pebbles, mosses, and gay butterflies, i shall see good resolutions carried out, conquered faults, and a promise well kept.
shall we do this, dan?"
the boys answered with one of the looks which said much, for it showed that he felt and understood her wish and words, although he did not know how to express his interest and gratitude for such care and kindness.
she understood the look, and seeing by the color that flushed up to his forehead that he was touched, as she wished him to be, she said no more about that side of the new plan, but pulled out the upper drawer, dusted it, and set it on two chairs before the sofa, saying briskly, "now, let us begin at once by putting those nice beetles in a safe place.
these compartments will hold a good deal, you see.
i'd pin the butterflies and bugs round the sides; they will be quite safe there, and leave room for the heavy things below.
i'll give you some cotton wool, and clean paper and pins, and you can get ready for the week's work."
""but i ca n't go out to find any new things," said dan, looking piteously at his foot.
""that's true; never mind, we'll let these treasures do for this week, and i dare say the boys will bring you loads of things if you ask them."
""they do n't know the right sort; besides, if i lay, no, lie here all the time, i ca n't work and study, and earn my drawers."
""there are plenty of lessons you can learn lying there, and several little jobs of work you can do for me."
""can i?"
and dan looked both surprised and pleased.
""you can learn to be patient and cheerful in spite of pain and no play.
you can amuse teddy for me, wind cotton, read to me when i sew, and do many things without hurting your foot, which will make the days pass quickly, and not be wasted ones."
here demi ran in with a great butterfly in one hand, and a very ugly little toad in the other.
""see, dan, i found them, and ran back to give them to you; are n't they beautiful ones?"
panted demi, all out of breath.
dan laughed at the toad, and said he had no place to put him, but the butterfly was a beauty, and if mrs. jo would give him a big pin, he would stick it right up in the drawer.
""i do n't like to see the poor thing struggle on a pin; if it must be killed, let us put it out of pain at once with a drop of camphor," said mrs. jo, getting out the bottle.
""i know how to do it mr. hyde always killed'em that way but i did n't have any camphor, so i use a pin," and dan gently poured a drop on the insect's head, when the pale green wings fluttered an instant, and then grew still.
this dainty little execution was hardly over when teddy shouted from the bedroom, "oh, the little trabs are out, and the big one's eaten'em all up."
demi and his aunt ran to the rescue, and found teddy dancing excitedly in a chair, while two little crabs were scuttling about the floor, having got through the wires of the cage.
a third was clinging to the top of the cage, evidently in terror of his life, for below appeared a sad yet funny sight.
the big crab had wedged himself into the little recess where polly's cup used to stand, and there he sat eating one of his relations in the coolest way.
all the claws of the poor victim were pulled off, and he was turned upside down, his upper shell held in one claw close under the mouth of the big crab like a dish, while he leisurely ate out of it with the other claw, pausing now and then to turn his queer bulging eyes from side to side, and to put out a slender tongue and lick them in a way that made the children scream with laughter.
mrs. jo carried the cage in for dan to see the sight, while demi caught and confined the wanderers under an inverted wash-bowl.
""i'll have to let these fellers go, for i ca n't keep'em in the house," said dan, with evident regret.
""i'll take care of them for you, if you will tell me how, and they can live in my turtle-tank just as well as not," said demi, who found them more interesting even that his beloved slow turtles.
so dan gave him directions about the wants and habits of the crabs, and demi bore them away to introduce them to their new home and neighbors.
""what a good boy he is!"
said dan, carefully settling the first butterfly, and remembering that demi had given up his walk to bring it to him.
""he ought to be, for a great deal has been done to make him so."
""he's had folks to tell him things, and to help him; i have n't," said dan, with a sigh, thinking of his neglected childhood, a thing he seldom did, and feeling as if he had not had fair play somehow.
""i know it, dear, and for that reason i do n't expect as much from you as from demi, though he is younger; you shall have all the help that we can give you now, and i hope to teach you how to help yourself in the best way.
have you forgotten what father bhaer told you when you were here before, about wanting to be good, and asking god to help you?"
""no, ma'am," very low.
""do you try that way still?"
""no, ma'am," lower still.
""will you do it every night to please me?"
""yes, ma'am," very soberly.
""i shall depend on it, and i think i shall know if you are faithful to your promise, for these things always show to people who believe in them, though not a word is said.
now here is a pleasant story about a boy who hurt his foot worse than you did yours; read it, and see how bravely he bore his troubles."
she put that charming little book, "the crofton boys," into his hands, and left him for an hour, passing in and out from time to time that he might not feel lonely.
dan did not love to read, but soon got so interested that he was surprised when the boys came home.
daisy brought him a nosegay of wild flowers, and nan insisted on helping bring him his supper, as he lay on the sofa with the door open into the dining-room, so that he could see the lads at table, and they could nod socially to him over their bread and butter.
mr. bhaer carried him away to his bed early, and teddy came in his night-gown to say good-night, for he went to his little nest with the birds.
""i want to say my prayers to danny; may i?"
he asked; and when his mother said, "yes," the little fellow knelt down by dan's bed, and folding his chubby hands, said softly, "pease dod bess everybody, and hep me to be dood."
then he went away smiling with sleepy sweetness over his mother's shoulder.
but after the evening talk was done, the evening song sung, and the house grew still with beautiful sunday silence, dan lay in his pleasant room wide awake, thinking new thoughts, feeling new hopes and desires stirring in his boyish heart, for two good angels had entered in: love and gratitude began the work which time and effort were to finish; and with an earnest wish to keep his first promise, dan folded his hands together in the darkness, and softly whispered teddy's little prayer, "please god bless every one, and help me to be good."
chapter xi.
uncle teddy for a week dan only moved from bed to sofa; a long week and a hard one, for the hurt foot was very painful at times, the quiet days were very wearisome to the active lad, longing to be out enjoying the summer weather, and especially difficult was it to be patient.
but dan did his best, and every one helped him in their various ways; so the time passed, and he was rewarded at last by hearing the doctor say, on saturday morning, "this foot is doing better than i expected.
give the lad the crutch this afternoon, and let him stump about the house a little."
""hooray!"
shouted nat, and raced away to tell the other boys the good news.
everybody was very glad, and after dinner the whole flock assembled to behold dan crutch himself up and down the hall a few times before he settled in the porch to hold a sort of levee.
he was much pleased at the interest and good-will shown him, and brightened up more and more every minute; for the boys came to pay their respects, the little girls fussed about him with stools and cushions, and teddy watched over him as if he was a frail creature unable to do anything for himself.
they were still sitting and standing about the steps, when a carriage stopped at the gate, a hat was waved from it, and with a shout of "uncle teddy!
uncle teddy!"
rob scampered down the avenue as fast as his short legs would carry him.
all he boys but dan ran after him to see who should be first to open the gate, and in a moment the carriage drove up with boys swarming all over it, while uncle teddy sat laughing in the midst, with his little daughter on his knee.
""stop the triumphal car and let jupiter descend," he said, and jumping out ran up the steps to meet mrs. bhaer, who stood smiling and clapping her hands like a girl.
""how goes it, teddy?"
""all right, jo."
then they shook hands, and mr. laurie put bess into her aunt's arms, saying, as the child hugged her tight, "goldilocks wanted to see you so much that i ran away with her, for i was quite pining for a sight of you myself.
we want to play with your boys for an hour or so, and to see how "the old woman who lived in a shoe, and had so many children she did not know what to do," is getting on."
""i'm so glad!
play away, and do n't get into mischief," answered mrs. jo, as the lads crowded round the pretty child, admiring her long golden hair, dainty dress, and lofty ways, for the little "princess," as they called her, allowed no one to kiss her, but sat smiling down upon them, and graciously patting their heads with her little, white hands.
they all adored her, especially rob, who considered her a sort of doll, and dared not touch her lest she should break, but worshipped her at a respectful distance, made happy by an occasional mark of favor from her little highness.
as she immediately demanded to see daisy's kitchen, she was borne off by mrs. jo, with a train of small boys following.
the others, all but nat and demi, ran away to the menagerie and gardens to have all in order; for mr. laurie always took a general survey, and looked disappointed if things were not flourishing.
standing on the steps, he turned to dan, saying like an old acquaintance, though he had only seen him once or twice before, "how is the foot?"
""better, sir."
""rather tired of the house, are n't you?"
""guess i am!"
and dan's eyes roved away to the green hills and woods where he longed to be.
""suppose we take a little turn before the others come back?
that big, easy carriage will be quite safe and comfortable, and a breath of fresh air will do you good.
get a cushion and a shawl, demi, and let's carry dan off."
the boys thought it a capital joke, and dan looked delighted, but asked, with an unexpected burst of virtue, "will mrs. bhaer like it?"
""oh, yes; we settled all that a minute ago."
""you did n't say any thing about it, so i do n't see how you could," said demi, inquisitively.
""we have a way of sending messages to one another, without any words.
it is a great improvement on the telegraph."
""i know it's eyes; i saw you lift your eyebrows, and nod toward the carriage, and mrs. bhaer laughed and nodded back again," cried nat, who was quite at his ease with kind mr. laurie by this time.
""right.
now them, come on," and in a minute dan found himself settled in the carriage, his foot on a cushion on the seat opposite, nicely covered with a shawl, which fell down from the upper regions in a most mysterious manner, just when they wanted it.
demi climbed up to the box beside peter, the black coachman.
nat sat next dan in the place of honor, while uncle teddy would sit opposite, to take care of the foot, he said, but really that he might study the faces before him both so happy, yet so different, for dan's was square, and brown, and strong, while nat's was long, and fair, and rather weak, but very amiable with its mild eyes and good forehead.
""by the way, i've got a book somewhere here that you may like to see," said the oldest boy of the party, diving under the seat and producing a book which make dan exclaim, "oh!
by george, is n't that a stunner?"
as he turned the leaves, and saw fine plates of butterflies, and birds, and every sort of interesting insect, colored like life.
he was so charmed that he forgot his thanks, but mr. laurie did not mind, and was quite satisfied to see the boy's eager delight, and to hear this exclamations over certain old friends as he came to them.
nat leaned on his shoulder to look, and demi turned his back to the horses, and let his feet dangle inside the carriage, so that he might join in the conversation.
when they got among the beetles, mr. laurie took a curious little object out of his vest-pocket, and laying it in the palm of his hand, said, "there's a beetle that is thousands of years old;" and then, while the lads examined the queer stone-bug, that looked so old and gray, he told them how it came out of the wrappings of a mummy, after lying for ages in a famous tomb.
finding them interested, he went on to tell about the egyptians, and the strange and splendid ruins they have left behind them the nile, and how he sailed up the mighty river, with the handsome dark men to work his boat; how he shot alligators, saw wonderful beasts and birds; and afterwards crossed the desert on a camel, who pitched him about like a ship in a storm.
""uncle teddy tells stories "most as well as grandpa," said demi, approvingly, when the tale was done, and the boys" eyes asked for more.
""thank you," said mr. laurie, quite soberly, for he considered demi's praise worth having, for children are good critics in such cases, and to suit them is an accomplishment that any one may be proud of.
""here's another trifle or two that i tucked into my pocket as i was turning over my traps to see if i had any thing that would amuse dan," and uncle teddy produced a fine arrow-head and a string of wampum.
""oh!
tell about the indians," cried demi, who was fond of playing wigwam.
""dan knows lots about them," added nat.
""more than i do, i dare say.
tell us something," and mr. laurie looked as interested as the other two.
""mr. hyde told me; he's been among'em, and can talk their talk, and likes'em," began dan, flattered by their attention, but rather embarrassed by having a grown-up listener.
""what is wampum for?"
asked curious demi, from his perch.
the others asked questions likewise, and, before he knew it, dan was reeling off all mr. hyde had told him, as they sailed down the river a few weeks before.
mr. laurie listened well, but found the boy more interesting than the indians, for mrs. jo had told him about dan, and he rather took a fancy to the wild lad, who ran away as he himself had often longed to do, and who was slowly getting tamed by pain and patience.
""i've been thinking that it would be a good plan for you fellows to have a museum of your own; a place in which to collect all the curious and interesting things that you find, and make, and have given you.
mrs. jo is too kind to complain, but it is rather hard for her to have the house littered up with all sorts of rattletraps, half-a-pint of dor-bugs in one of her best vases, for instance, a couple of dead bats nailed up in the back entry, wasps nests tumbling down on people's heads, and stones lying round everywhere, enough to pave the avenue.
there are not many women who would stand that sort of thing, are there, now?"
as mr. laurie spoke with a merry look in his eyes, the boys laughed and nudged one another, for it was evident that some one told tales out of school, else how could he know of the existence of these inconvenient treasures.
""where can we put them, then?"
said demi, crossing his legs and leaning down to argue the question.
""in the old carriage-house."
""but it leaks, and there is n't any window, nor any place to put things, and it's all dust and cobwebs," began nat.
""wait till gibbs and i have touched it up a bit, and then see how you like it.
he is to come over on monday to get it ready; then next saturday i shall come out, and we will fix it up, and make the beginning, at least, of a fine little museum.
every one can bring his things, and have a place for them; and dan is to be the head man, because he knows most about such matters, and it will be quiet, pleasant work for him now that he ca n't knock about much."
""wo n't that be jolly?"
cried nat, while dan smiled all over his face and had not a word to say, but hugged his book, and looked at mr. laurie as if he thought him one of the greatest public benefactors that ever blessed the world.
""shall i go round again, sir?"
asked peter, as they came to the gate, after two slow turns about the half-mile triangle.
""no, we must be prudent, else we ca n't come again.
i must go over the premises, take a look at the carriage-house, and have a little talk with mrs. jo before i go;" and, having deposited dan on his sofa to rest and enjoy his book, uncle teddy went off to have a frolic with the lads who were raging about the place in search of him.
leaving the little girls to mess up-stairs, mrs. bhaer sat down by dan, and listened to his eager account of the drive till the flock returned, dusty, warm, and much excited about the new museum, which every one considered the most brilliant idea of the age.
""i always wanted to endow some sort of an institution, and i am going to begin with this," said mr. laurie, sitting down on a stool at mrs. jo's feet.
""you have endowed one already.
what do you call this?"
and mrs. jo pointed to the happy-faced lads, who had camped upon the floor about him.
""i call it a very promising bhaer-garden, and i'm proud to be a member of it.
did you know i was the head boy in this school?"
he asked, turning to dan, and changing the subject skilfully, for he hated to be thanked for the generous things he did.
""i thought franz was!"
answered dan, wondering what the man meant.
""oh, dear no!
i'm the first boy mrs. jo ever had to take care of, and i was such a bad one that she is n't done with me yet, though she has been working at me for years and years."
""how old she must be!"
said nat, innocently.
""she began early, you see.
poor thing!
she was only fifteen when she took me, and i led her such a life, it's a wonder she is n't wrinkled and gray, and quite worn out," and mr. laurie looked up at her laughing.
""do n't teddy; i wo n't have you abuse yourself so;" and mrs. jo stroked the curly black head at her knee as affectionately as ever, for, in spite of every thing teddy was her boy still.
""if it had n't been for you, there never would have been a plumfield.
it was my success with you, sir, that gave me courage to try my pet plan.
so the boys may thank you for it, and name the new institution "the laurence museum," in honor of its founder, wo n't we, boys?"
she added, looking very like the lively jo of old times.
""we will!
we will!"
shouted the boys, throwing up their hats, for though they had taken them off on entering the house, according to rule, they had been in too much of a hurry to hang them up.
""i'm as hungry as a bear, ca n't i have a cookie?"
asked mr. laurie, when the shout subsided and he had expressed his thanks by a splendid bow.
""trot out and ask asia for the gingerbread-box, demi.
it is n't in order to eat between meals, but, on this joyful occasion, we wo n't mind, and have a cookie all round," said mrs. jo; and when the box came she dealt them out with a liberal hand, every one munching away in a social circle.
suddenly, in the midst of a bite, mr. laurie cried out, "bless my heart, i forgot grandma's bundle!"
and running out to the carriage, returned with an interesting white parcel, which, being opened, disclosed a choice collection of beasts, birds, and pretty things cut out of crisp sugary cake, and baked a lovely brown.
""there's one for each, and a letter to tell which is whose.
grandma and hannah made them, and i tremble to think what would have happened to me if i had forgotten to leave them."
then, amid much laughing and fun, the cakes were distributed.
a fish for dan, a fiddle for nat, a book for demi, a money for tommy, a flower for daisy, a hoop for nan, who had driven twice round the triangle without stopping, a star for emil, who put on airs because he studied astronomy, and, best of all, an omnibus for franz, whose great delight was to drive the family bus.
stuffy got a fat pig, and the little folks had birds, and cats, and rabbits, with black currant eyes.
""now i must go.
where is my goldilocks?
mamma will come flying out to get her if i'm not back early," said uncle teddy, when the last crumb had vanished, which it speedily did, you may be sure.
the young ladies had gone into the garden, and while they waited till franz looked them up, jo and laurie stood at the door talking together.
""how does little giddy-gaddy come on?"
he asked, for nan's pranks amused him very much, and he was never tired of teasing jo about her.
""nicely; she is getting quite mannerly, and begins to see the error of her wild ways."
""do n't the boys encourage her in them?"
""yes; but i keep talking, and lately she has improved much.
you saw how prettily she shook hands with you, and how gentle she was with bess.
daisy's example has its effect upon her, and i'm quite sure that a few months will work wonders."
here mrs. jo's remarks were cut short by the appearance of nan tearing round the corner at a break-neck pace, driving a mettlesome team of four boys, and followed by daisy trundling bess in a wheelbarrow.
hat off, hair flying, whip cracking, and barrow bumping, up they came in a cloud of dust, looking as wild a set of little hoydens as one would wish to see.
""so, these are the model children, are they?
it's lucky i did n't bring mrs. curtis out to see your school for the cultivation of morals and manners; she would never have recovered from the shock of this spectacle," said mr. laurie, laughing at mrs. jo's premature rejoicing over nan's improvement.
""laugh away; i'll succeed yet.
as you used to say at college, quoting some professor, "though the experiment has failed, the principle remains the same,"" said mrs. bhaer, joining in the merriment.
""i'm afraid nan's example is taking effect upon daisy, instead of the other way.
look at my little princess!
she has utterly forgotten her dignity, and is screaming like the rest.
young ladies, what does this mean?"
and mr. laurie rescued his small daughter from impending destruction, for the four horses were champing their bits and curvetting madly all about her, as she sat brandishing a great whip in both hands.
""we're having a race, and i beat," shouted nan.
""i could have run faster, only i was afraid of spilling bess," screamed daisy.
""hi!
go long!"
cried the princess, giving such a flourish with her whip that the horses ran away, and were seen no more.
""my precious child!
come away from this ill-mannered crew before you are quite spoilt.
good-by, jo!
next time i come, i shall expect to find the boys making patchwork."
""it would n't hurt them a bit.
i do n't give in, mind you; for my experiments always fail a few times before they succeed.
love to amy and my blessed marmee," called mrs. jo, as the carriage drove away; and the last mr. laurie saw of her, she was consoling daisy for her failure by a ride in the wheelbarrow, and looking as if she liked it.
great was the excitement all the week about the repairs in the carriage-house, which went briskly on in spite of the incessant questions, advice, and meddling of the boys.
old gibbs was nearly driven wild with it all, but managed to do his work nevertheless; and by friday night the place was all in order roof mended, shelves up, walls whitewashed, a great window cut at the back, which let in a flood of sunshine, and gave them a fine view of the brook, the meadows, and the distant hills; and over the great door, painted in red letters, was "the laurence museum."
all saturday morning the boys were planning how it should be furnished with their spoils, and when mr. laurie arrived, bringing an aquarium which mrs. amy said she was tired of, their rapture was great.
the afternoon was spent in arranging things, and when the running and lugging and hammering was over, the ladies were invited to behold the institution.
it certainly was a pleasant place, airy, clean, and bright.
a hop-vine shook its green bells round the open window, the pretty aquarium stood in the middle of the room, with some delicate water plants rising above the water, and gold-fish showing their brightness as they floated to and fro below.
on either side of the window were rows of shelves ready to receive the curiosities yet to be found.
dan's tall cabinet stood before the great door which was fastened up, while the small door was to be used.
on the cabinet stood a queer indian idol, very ugly, but very interesting; old mr. laurence sent it, as well as a fine chinese junk in full sail, which had a conspicuous place on the long table in the middle of the room.
above, swinging in a loop, and looking as if she was alive, hung polly, who died at an advanced age, had been carefully stuffed, and was no presented by mrs. jo.
the walls were decorated with all sorts of things.
a snake's skin, a big wasp's nest, a birch-bark canoe, a string of birds" eggs, wreaths of gray moss from the south, and a bunch of cotton-pods.
the dead bats had a place, also a large turtle-shell, and an ostrich-egg proudly presented by demi, who volunteered to explain these rare curiosities to guests whenever they liked.
there were so many stones that it was impossible to accept them all, so only a few of the best were arranged among the shells on the shelves, the rest were piled up in corners, to be examined by dan at his leisure.
every one was eager to give something, even silas, who sent home for a stuffed wild-cat killed in his youth.
it was rather moth-eaten and shabby, but on a high bracket and best side foremost the effect was fine, for the yellow glass eyes glared, and the mouth snarled so naturally, that teddy shook in his little shoes at sight of it, when he came bringing his most cherished treasure, one cocoon, to lay upon the shrine of science.
""is n't it beautiful?
i'd no idea we had so many curious things.
i gave that; do n't it look well?
we might make a lot by charging something for letting folks see it."
jack added that last suggestion to the general chatter that went on as the family viewed the room.
""this is a free museum and if there is any speculating on it i'll paint out the name over the door," said mr. laurie, turning so quickly that jack wished he had held his tongue.
""hear!
hear!"
cried mr. bhaer.
""speech!
speech!"
added mrs. jo.
""ca n't, i'm too bashful.
you give them a lecture yourself you are used to it," mr. laurie answered, retreating towards the window, meaning to escape.
but she held him fast, and said, laughing as she looked at the dozen pairs of dirty hands about her, "if i did lecture, it would on the chemical and cleansing properties of soap.
come now, as the founder of the institution, you really ought to give us a few moral remarks, and we will applaud tremendously."
seeing that there was no way of escaping, mr. laurie looked up at polly hanging overhead, seemed to find inspiration in the brilliant old bird, and sitting down upon the table, said, in his pleasant way, "there is one thing i'd like to suggest, boys, and that is, i want you to get some good as well as much pleasure out of this.
just putting curious or pretty things here wo n't do it; so suppose you read up about them, so that when anybody asks questions you can answer them, and understand the matter.
i used to like these things myself, and should enjoy hearing about them now, for i've forgotten all i once knew.
it was n't much, was it, jo?
here's dan now, full of stories about birds, and bugs, and so on; let him take care of the museum, and once a week the rest of you take turns to read a composition, or tell about some animal, mineral, or vegetable.
we should all like that, and i think it would put considerable useful knowledge into our heads.
what do you say, professor?"
""i like it much, and will give the lads all the help i can.
but they will need books to read up these new subjects, and we have not many, i fear," began mr. bhaer, looking much pleased, planning many fine lectures on geology, which he liked.
""we should have a library for the special purpose."
""is that a useful sort of book, dan?"
asked mr. laurie, pointing to the volume that lay open by the cabinet.
""oh, yes!
it tells all i want to know about insects.
i had it here to see how to fix the butterflies right.
i covered it, so it is not hurt;" and dan caught it up, fearing the lender might think him careless.
""give it here a minute;" and, pulling out his pencil, mr. laurie wrote dan's name in it, saying, as he set the book up on one of the corner shelves, where nothing stood but a stuffed bird without a tail, "there, that is the beginning of the museum library.
i'll hunt up some more books, and demi shall keep them in order.
where are those jolly little books we used to read, jo?
"insect architecture" or some such name, all about ants having battles, and bees having queens, and crickets eating holes in our clothes and stealing milk, and larks of that sort."
""in the garret at home.
i'll have them sent out, and we will plunge into natural history with a will," said mrs. jo, ready for any thing.
""wo n't it be hard to write about such things?"
asked nat, who hated compositions.
""at first, perhaps; but you will soon like it.
if you think that hard, how would you like to have this subject given to you, as it was to a girl of thirteen: a conversation between themistocles, aristides, and pericles on the proposed appropriation of funds of the confederacy of delos for the ornamentation of athens?"
said mrs. jo.
the boys groaned at the mere sound of the long names, and the gentlemen laughed at the absurdity of the lesson.
""did she write it?"
asked demi, in an awe-stricken tone.
""yes, but you can imagine what a piece of work she make of it, though she was rather a bright child."
""i'd like to have seen it," said mr. bhaer.
""perhaps i can find it for you; i went to school with her," and mrs. jo looked so wicked that every one knew who the little girl was.
hearing of this fearful subject for a composition quite reconciled the boys to the thought of writing about familiar things.
wednesday afternoon was appointed for the lectures, as they preferred to call them, for some chose to talk instead of write.
mr. bhaer promised a portfolio in which the written productions should be kept, and mrs. bhaer said she would attend the course with great pleasure.
then the dirty-handed society went off the wash, followed by the professor, trying to calm the anxiety of rob, who had been told by tommy that all water was full of invisible pollywogs.
""i like your plan very much, only do n't be too generous, teddy," said mrs. bhaer, when they were left alone.
""you know most of the boys have got to paddle their own canoes when they leave us, and too much sitting in the lap of luxury will unfit them for it."
""i'll be moderate, but do let me amuse myself.
i get desperately tired of business sometimes, and nothing freshens me up like a good frolic with your boys.
i like that dan very much, jo.
he is n't demonstrative; but he has the eye of a hawk, and when you have tamed him a little he will do you credit."
""i'm so glad you think so.
thank you very much for your kindness to him, especially for this museum affair; it will keep him happy while he is lame, give me a chance to soften and smooth this poor, rough lad, and make him love us.
what did inspire you with such a beautiful, helpful idea, teddy?"
asked mrs. bhaer, glancing back at the pleasant room, as she turned to leave it.
laurie took both her hands in his, and answered, with a look that made her eyes fill with happy tears, "dear jo!
i have known what it is to be a motherless boy, and i never can forget how much you and yours have done for me all these years."
chapter xii.
huckleberries there was a great clashing of tin pails, much running to and fro, and frequent demands for something to eat, one august afternoon, for the boys were going huckleberrying, and made as much stir about it as if they were setting out to find the north west passage.
""now, my lads, get off as quietly as you can, for rob is safely out of the way, and wo n't see you," said mrs. bhaer, as she tied daisy's broad-brimmed hat, and settled the great blue pinafore in which she had enveloped nan.
but the plan did not succeed, for rob had heard the bustle, decided to go, and prepared himself, without a thought of disappointment.
the troop was just getting under way when the little man came marching downstairs with his best hat on, a bright tin pail in his hand, and a face beaming with satisfaction.
""oh, dear!
now we shall have a scene," sighed mrs. bhaer, who found her eldest son very hard to manage at times.
""i'm all ready," said rob, and took his place in the ranks with such perfect unconsciousness of his mistake, that it really was very hard to undeceive him.
""it's too far for you, my love; stay and take care of me, for i shall be all alone," began his mother.
""you've got teddy.
i'm a big boy, so i can go; you said i might when i was bigger, and i am now," persisted rob, with a cloud beginning to dim the brightness of his happy face.
""we are going up to the great pasture, and it's ever so far; we do n't want you tagging on," cried jack, who did not admire the little boys.
""i wo n't tag, i'll run and keep up.
o mamma!
let me go!
i want to fill my new pail, and i'll bring'em all to you.
please, please, i will be good!"
prayed robby, looking up at his mother, so grieved and disappointed that her heart began to fail her.
""but, my deary, you'll get so tired and hot you wo n't have a good time.
wait till i go, and then we will stay all day, and pick as many berries as you want."
""you never do go, you are so busy, and i'm tired of waiting.
i'd rather go and get the berries for you all myself.
i love to pick'em, and i want to fill my new pail dreffly," sobbed rob.
the pathetic sight of great tears tinkling into the dear new pail, and threatening to fill it with salt water instead of huckleberries, touched all the ladies present.
his mother patted the weeper on his back; daisy offered to stay home with him; and nan said, in her decided way, "let him come; i'll take care of him."
""if franz was going i would n't mind, for he is very careful; but he is haying with the father, and i'm not sure about the rest of you," began mrs. bhaer.
""it's so far," put in jack.
""i'd carry him if i was going wish i was," said dan, with a sigh.
""thank you, dear, but you must take care of your foot.
i wish i could go.
stop a minute, i think i can manage it after all;" and mrs. bhaer ran out to the steps, waving her apron wildly.
silas was just driving away in the hay-cart, but turned back, and agreed at once, when mrs. jo proposed that he should take the whole party to the pasture, and go for them at five o'clock.
""it will delay your work a little, but never mind; we will pay you in huckleberry pies," said mrs. jo, knowing silas's weak point.
his rough, brown face brightened up, and he said, with a cheery "haw!
haw!"
""wal now, mis" bhaer, if you go to bribin" of me, i shall give in right away."
""now, boys, i have arranged it so that you can all go," said mrs. bhaer, running back again, much relieved, for she loved to make them happy, and always felt miserable when she had disturbed the serenity of her little sons; for she believed that the small hopes and plans and pleasures of children should be tenderly respected by grown-up people, and never rudely thwarted or ridiculed.
""can i go?"
said dan, delighted.
""i thought especially of you.
be careful, and never mind the berries, but sit about and enjoy the lovely things which you know how to find all about you," answered mrs. bhaer, who remembered his kind offer to her boy.
""me too!
me too!"
sung rob, dancing with joy, and clapping his precious pail and cover like castanets.
""yes, and daisy and nan must take good care of you.
be at the bars at five o'clock, and silas will come for you all."
robby cast himself upon his mother in a burst of gratitude, promising to bring her every berry he picked, and not eat one.
then they were all packed into the hay-cart, and went rattling away, the brightest face among the dozen being that of rob, as he sat between his two temporary little mothers, beaming upon the whole world, and waving his best hat; for his indulgent mamma had not the heart to bereave him of it, since this was a gala-day to him.
such a happy afternoon as they had, in spite of the mishaps which usually occur on such expeditions!
of course tommy came to grief, tumbled upon a hornet's nest and got stung; but being used to woe, he bore the smart manfully, till dan suggested the application of damp earth, which much assuaged the pain.
daisy saw a snake, and flying from it lost half her berries; but demi helped her to fill up again, and discussed reptiles most learnedly the while.
ned fell out of a tree, and split his jacket down the back, but suffered no other fracture.
emil and jack established rival claims to a certain thick patch, and while they were squabbling about it, stuffy quickly and quietly stripped the bushes and fled to the protection of dan, who was enjoying himself immensely.
the crutch was no longer necessary, and he was delighted to see how strong his foot felt as he roamed about the great pasture, full of interesting rocks and stumps, with familiar little creatures in the grass, and well-known insects dancing in the air.
but of all the adventures that happened on this afternoon that which befell nan and rob was the most exciting, and it long remained one of the favorite histories of the household.
having explored the country pretty generally, torn three rents in her frock, and scratched her face in a barberry-bush, nan began to pick the berries that shone like big, black beads on the low, green bushes.
her nimble fingers flew, but still her basket did not fill up as rapidly as she desired, so she kept wandering here and there to search for better places, instead of picking contentedly and steadily as daisy did.
rob followed nan, for her energy suited him better than his cousin's patience, and he too was anxious to have the biggest and best berries for marmar.
""i keep putting'em in, but it do n't fill up, and i'm so tired," said rob, pausing a moment to rest his short legs, and beginning to think huckleberrying was not all his fancy painted it; for the sun blazed, nan skipped hither and thither like a grasshopper, and the berries fell out of his pail almost as fast as he put them in, because, in his struggles with the bushes, it was often upside-down.
""last time we came they were ever so much thicker over that wall great bouncers; and there is a cave there where the boys made a fire.
let's go and fill our things quick, and then hide in the cave and let the others find us," proposed nan, thirsting for adventures.
rob consented, and away they went, scrambling over the wall and running down the sloping fields on the other side, till they were hidden among the rocks and underbrush.
the berries were thick, and at last the pails were actually full.
it was shady and cool down there, and a little spring gave the thirsty children a refreshing drink out of its mossy cup.
""now we will go and rest in the cave, and eat our lunch," said nan, well satisfied with her success so far.
""do you know the way?"
asked rob."
"course i do; i've been once, and i always remember.
did n't i go and get my box all right?"
that convinced rob, and he followed blindly as nan led him over stock and stone, and brought him, after much meandering, to a small recess in the rock, where the blackened stones showed that fires had been made.
""now, is n't it nice?"
asked nan, as she took out a bit of bread-and-butter, rather damaged by being mixed up with nails, fishhooks, stones and other foreign substances, in the young lady's pocket.
""yes; do you think they will find us soon?"
asked rob, who found the shadowy glen rather dull, and began to long for more society.
""no, i do n't; because if i hear them, i shall hide, and have fun making them find me."
""p'raps they wo n't come."
""do n't care; i can get home myself."
""is it a great way?"
asked rob, looking at his little stubby boots, scratched and wet with his long wandering.
""it's six miles, i guess."
nan's ideas of distance were vague, and her faith in her own powers great.
""i think we better go now," suggested rob, presently.
""i sha n't till i have picked over my berries;" and nan began what seemed to rob an endless task.
""oh, dear!
you said you'd take good care of me," he sighed, as the sun seemed to drop behind the hill all of a sudden.
""well i am taking good care of you as hard as i can.
do n't be cross, child; i'll go in a minute," said nan, who considered five-year-old robby a mere infant compared to herself.
so little rob sat looking anxiously about him, and waiting patiently, for, spite of some misgivings, he felt great confidence in nan.
""i guess it's going to be night pretty soon," he observed, as if to himself, as a mosquito bit him, and the frogs in a neighboring marsh began to pipe up for the evening concert.
""my goodness me!
so it is.
come right away this minute, or they will be gone," cried nan, looking up from her work, and suddenly perceiving that the sun was down.
""i heard a horn about an hour ago; may be they were blowing for us," said rob, trudging after his guide as she scrambled up the steep hill.
""where was it?"
asked nan, stopping short.
""over that way;" he pointed with a dirty little finger in an entirely wrong direction.
""let's go that way and meet them;" and nan wheeled about, and began to trot through the bushes, feeling a trifle anxious, for there were so many cow-paths all about she could not remember which way they came.
on they went over stock and stone again, pausing now and then to listen for the horn, which did not blow any more, for it was only the moo of a cow on her way home.
""i do n't remember seeing that pile of stones do you?"
asked nan, as she sat on a wall to rest a moment and take an observation.
""i do n't remember any thing, but i want to go home," and rob's voice had a little tremble in it that made nan put her arms round him and lift him gently down, saying, in her most capable way, "i'm going just as fast as i can, dear.
do n't cry, and when we come to the road, i'll carry you."
""where is the road?"
and robby wiped his eyes to look for it.
""over by that big tree.
do n't you know that's the one ned tumbled out of?"
""so it is.
may be they waited for us; i'd like to ride home would n't you?"
and robby brightened up as he plodded along toward the end of the great pasture.
""no, i'd rather walk," answered nan, feeling quite sure that she would be obliged to do so, and preparing her mind for it.
another long trudge through the fast-deepening twilight and another disappointment, for when they reached the tree, they found to their dismay that it was not the one ned climbed, and no road anywhere appeared.
""are we lost?"
quavered rob, clasping his pail in despair.
""not much.
i do n't just see which way to go, and i guess we'd better call."
so they both shouted till they were hoarse, yet nothing answered but the frogs in full chorus.
""there is another tall tree over there, perhaps that's the one," said nan, whose heart sunk within her, though she still spoke bravely.
""i do n't think i can go any more; my boots are so heavy i ca n't pull'em;" and robby sat down on a stone quite worn out.
""then we must stay here all night.
i do n't care much, if snakes do n't come."
""i'm frightened of snakes.
i ca n't stay all night.
oh, dear!
i do n't like to be lost," and rob puckered up his face to cry, when suddenly a thought occurred to him, and he said, in a tone of perfect confidence, "marmar will come and find me she always does; i ai n't afraid now."
""she wo n't know where we are."
""she did n't know i was shut up in the ice-house, but she found me.
i know she'll come," returned robby, so trustfully, that nan felt relieved, and sat down by him, saying, with a remorseful sigh, "i wish we had n't run away."
""you made me; but i do n't mind much marmar will love me just the same," answered rob, clinging to his sheet-anchor when all other hope was gone.
""i'm so hungry.
let's eat our berries," proposed nan, after a pause, during which rob began to nod.
""so am i, but i ca n't eat mine,'cause i told marmar i'd keep them all for her."
""you'll have to eat them if no one comes for us," said nan, who felt like contradicting every thing just then.
""if we stay here a great many days, we shall eat up all the berries in the field, and then we shall starve," she added grimly.
""i shall eat sassafras.
i know a big tree of it, and dan told me how squirrels dig up the roots and eat them, and i love to dig," returned rob, undaunted by the prospect of starvation.
""yes; and we can catch frogs, and cook them.
my father ate some once, and he said they were nice," put in nan, beginning to find a spice of romance even in being lost in a huckleberry pasture.
""how could we cook frogs?
we have n't got any fire."
""i do n't know; next time i'll have matches in my pocket," said nan, rather depressed by this obstacle to the experiment in frog-cookery.
""could n't we light a fire with a fire-fly?"
asked rob, hopefully, as he watched them flitting to and fro like winged sparks.
""let's try;" and several minutes were pleasantly spent in catching the flies, and trying to make them kindle a green twig or two.
""it's a lie to call them fire-flies when there is n't a fire in them," nan said, throwing one unhappy insect away with scorn, though it shone its best, and obligingly walked up and down the twigs to please the innocent little experimenters.
""marmar's a good while coming," said rob, after another pause, during which they watched the stars overhead, smelt the sweet fern crushed under foot, and listened to the crickets" serenade.
""i do n't see why god made any night; day is so much pleasanter," said nan, thoughtfully.
""it's to sleep in," answered rob, with a yawn.
""then do go to sleep," said nan, pettishly.
""i want my own bed.
oh, i wish i could see teddy!"
cried rob, painfully reminded of home by the soft chirp of birds safe in their little nests.
""i do n't believe your mother will ever find us," said nan, who was becoming desperate, for she hated patient waiting of any sort.
""it's so dark she wo n't see us."
""it was all black in the ice-house, and i was so scared i did n't call her, but she saw me; and she will see me now, no matter how dark it is," returned confiding rob, standing up to peer into the gloom for the help which never failed him.
""i see her!
i see her!"
he cried, and ran as fast as his tired legs would take him toward a dark figure slowly approaching.
suddenly he stopped, then turned about, and came stumbling back, screaming in a great panic, "no, it's a bear, a big black one!"
and hid his face in nan's skirts.
for a moment nan quailed; ever her courage gave out at the thought of a real bear, and she was about to turn and flee in great disorder, when a mild "moo!"
changed her fear to merriment, as she said, laughing, "it's a cow, robby!
the nice, black cow we saw this afternoon."
the cow seemed to feel that it was not just the thing to meet two little people in her pasture after dark, and the amiable beast paused to inquire into the case.
she let them stroke her, and stood regarding them with her soft eyes so mildly, that nan, who feared no animal but a bear, was fired with a desire to milk her.
""silas taught me how; and berries and milk would be so nice," she said, emptying the contents of her pail into her hat, and boldly beginning her new task, while rob stood by and repeated, at her command, the poem from mother goose: "cushy cow, bonny, let down your milk, let down your milk to me, and i will give you a gown of silk, a gown of silk and a silver tee."
but the immortal rhyme had little effect, for the benevolent cow had already been milked, and had only half a gill to give the thirsty children.
""shoo!
get away!
you are an old cross patch," cried nan, ungratefully, as she gave up the attempt in despair; and poor molly walked on with a gentle gurgle of surprise and reproof.
""each can have a sip, and then we must take a walk.
we shall go to sleep if we do n't; and lost people must n't sleep.
do n't you know how hannah lee in the pretty story slept under the snow and died?"
""but there is n't any snow now, and it's nice and warm," said rob, who was not blessed with as lively a fancy as nan.
""no matter, we will poke about a little, and call some more; and then, if nobody comes, we will hide under the bushes, like hop - "o-my-thumb and his brothers."
it was a very short walk, however, for rob was so sleepy he could not get on, and tumbled down so often that nan entirely lost patience, being half distracted by the responsibility she had taken upon herself.
""if you tumble down again, i'll shake you," she said, lifting the poor little man up very kindly as she spoke, for nan's bark was much worse than her bite.
""please do n't.
it's my boots they keep slipping so;" and rob manfully checked the sob just ready to break out, adding, with a plaintive patience that touched nan's heart, "if the skeeters did n't bite me so, i could go to sleep till marmar comes."
""put your head on my lap, and i'll cover you up with my apron; i'm not afraid of the night," said nan, sitting down and trying to persuade herself that she did not mind the shadow nor the mysterious rustlings all about her.
""wake me up when she comes," said rob, and was fast asleep in five minutes with his head in nan's lap under the pinafore.
the little girl sat for some fifteen minutes, staring about her with anxious eyes, and feeling as if each second was an hour.
then a pale light began to glimmer over the hill-top and she said to herself, "i guess the night is over and morning is coming.
i'd like to see the sun rise, so i'll watch, and when it comes up we can find our way right home."
but before the moon's round face peeped above the hill to destroy her hope, nan had fallen asleep, leaning back in a little bower of tall ferns, and was deep in a mid-summer night's dream of fire-flies and blue aprons, mountains of huckleberries, and robby wiping away the tears of a black cow, who sobbed, "i want to go home!
i want to go home!"
while the children were sleeping, peacefully lulled by the drowsy hum of many neighborly mosquitoes, the family at home were in a great state of agitation.
the hay-cart came at five, and all but jack, emil, nan, and rob were at the bars ready for it.
franz drove instead of silas, and when the boys told him that the others were going home through the wood, he said, looking ill-pleased, "they ought to have left rob to ride, he will be tired out by the long walk."
""it's shorter that way, and they will carry him," said stuffy, who was in a hurry for his supper.
""you are sure nan and rob went with them?"
""of course they did; i saw them getting over the wall, and sung out that it was most five, and jack called back that they were going the other way," explained tommy.
""very well, pile in then," and away rattled the hay-cart with the tired children and the full pails.
mrs. jo looked sober when she heard of the division of the party, and sent franz back with toby to find and bring the little ones home.
supper was over, and the family sitting about in the cool hall as usual, when franz came trotting back, hot, dusty, and anxious.
""have they come?"
he called out when half-way up the avenue.
""no!"
and mrs. jo flew out of her chair looking so alarmed that every one jumped up and gathered round franz.
""i ca n't find them anywhere," he began; but the words were hardly spoken when a loud "hullo!"
startled them all, and the next minute jack and emil came round the house.
""where are nan and rob?"
cried mrs. jo, clutching emil in a way that caused him to think his aunt had suddenly lost her wits.
""i do n't know.
they came home with the others, did n't they?"
he answered, quickly.
""no; george and tommy said they went with you."
""well, they did n't.
have n't seen them.
we took a swim in the pond, and came by the wood," said jack, looking alarmed, as well he might.
""call mr. bhaer, get the lanterns, and tell silas i want him."
that was all mrs. jo said, but they knew what she meant, and flew to obey her orders.
in ten minutes, mr. bhaer and silas were off to the wood, and franz tearing down the road on old andy to search the great pasture.
mrs. jo caught up some food from the table, a little bottle of brandy from the medicine-closet, took a lantern, and bidding jack and emil come with her, and the rest not stir, she trotted away on toby, never stopping for hat or shawl.
she heard some one running after her, but said not a word till, as she paused to call and listen, the light of her lantern shone on dan's face.
""you here!
i told jack to come," she said, half-inclined to send him back, much as she needed help.
""i would n't let him; he and emil had n't had any supper, and i wanted to come more than they did," he said, taking the lantern from her and smiling up in her face with the steady look in his eyes that made her feel as if, boy though he was, she had some one to depend on.
off she jumped, and ordered him on to toby, in spite of his pleading to walk; then they went on again along the dusty, solitary road, stopping every now and then to call and hearken breathlessly for little voices to reply.
when they came to the great pasture, other lights were already flitting to and fro like will-o" - the-wisps, and mr. bhaer's voice was heard shouting, "nan!
rob!
rob!
nan!"
in every part of the field.
silas whistled and roared, dan plunged here and there on toby, who seemed to understand the case, and went over the roughest places with unusual docility.
often mrs. jo hushed them all, saying, with a sob in her throat, "the noise may frighten them, let me call; robby will know my voice;" and then she would cry out the beloved little name in every tone of tenderness, till the very echoes whispered it softly, and the winds seemed to waft it willingly; but still no answer came.
the sky was overcast now, and only brief glimpses of the moon were seen, heat-lightening darted out of the dark clouds now and then, and a faint far-off rumble as of thunder told that a summer-storm was brewing.
""o my robby!
my robby!"
mourned poor mrs. jo, wandering up and down like a pale ghost, while dan kept beside her like a faithful fire-fly.
""what shall i say to nan's father if she comes to harm?
why did i ever trust my darling so far away?
fritz, do you hear any thing?"
and when a mournful, "no" came back, she wrung her hands so despairingly that dan sprung down from toby's back, tied the bridle to the bars, and said, in his decided way, "they may have gone down the spring i'm going to look."
he was over the wall and away so fast that she could hardly follow him; but when she reached the spot, he lowered the lantern and showed her with joy the marks of little feet in the soft ground about the spring.
she fell down on her knees to examine the tracks, and then sprung up, saying eagerly, "yes; that is the mark of my robby's little boots!
come this way, they must have gone on."
such a weary search!
but now some inexplicable instinct seemed to lead the anxious mother, for presently dan uttered a cry, and caught up a little shining object lying in the path.
it was the cover of the new tin pail, dropped in the first alarm of being lost.
mrs. jo hugged and kissed it as if it were a living thing; and when dan was about to utter a glad shout to bring the others to the spot, she stopped him, saying, as she hurried on, "no, let me find them; i let rob go, and i want to give him back to his father all myself."
a little farther on nan's hat appeared, and after passing the place more than once, they came at last upon the babes in the wood, both sound asleep.
dan never forgot the little picture on which the light of his lantern shone that night.
he thought mrs. jo would cry out, but she only whispered, "hush!"
as she softly lifted away the apron, and saw the little ruddy face below.
the berry-stained lips were half-open as the breath came and went, the yellow hair lay damp on the hot forehead, and both the chubby hands held fast the little pail still full.
the sight of the childish harvest, treasured through all the troubles of that night for her, seemed to touch mrs. jo to the heart, for suddenly she gathered up her boy, and began to cry over him, so tenderly, yet so heartily, that he woke up, and at first seemed bewildered.
then he remembered, and hugged her close, saying with a laugh of triumph, "i knew you'd come!
o marmar!
i did want you so!"
for a moment they kissed and clung to one another, quite forgetting all the world; for no matter how lost and soiled and worn-out wandering sons may be, mothers can forgive and forget every thing as they fold them in their fostering arms.
happy the son whose faith in his mother remains unchanged, and who, through all his wanderings, has kept some filial token to repay her brave and tender love.
dan meantime picked nan out of her bush, and, with a gentleness none but teddy ever saw in him before, he soothed her first alarm at the sudden waking, and wiped away her tears; for nan also began to cry for joy, it was so good to see a kind face and feel a strong arm round her after what seemed to her ages of loneliness and fear.
""my poor little girl, do n't cry!
you are all safe now, and no one shall say a word of blame to-night," said mrs. jo, taking nan into her capacious embrace, and cuddling both children as a hen might gather her lost chickens under her motherly wings.
""it was my fault; but i am sorry.
i tried to take care of him, and i covered him up and let him sleep, and did n't touch his berries, though i was so hungry; and i never will do it again truly, never, never," sobbed nan, quite lost in a sea of penitence and thankfulness.
""call them now, and let us get home," said mrs. jo; and dan, getting upon the wall, sent a joyful word "found!"
ringing over the field.
how the wandering lights came dancing from all sides, and gathered round the little group among the sweet fern bushes!
such a hugging, and kissing, and talking, and crying, as went on must have amazed the glowworms, and evidently delighted the mosquitoes, for they hummed frantically, while the little moths came in flocks to the party, and the frogs croaked as if they could not express their satisfaction loudly enough.
then they set out for home, a queer party, for franz rode on to tell the news; dan and toby led the way; then came nan in the strong arms of silas, who considered her "the smartest little baggage he ever saw," and teased her all the way home about her pranks.
mrs. bhaer would let no one carry rob but himself, and the little fellow, refreshed by sleep, sat up, and chattered gayly, feeling himself a hero, while his mother went beside him holding on to any pat of his precious little body that came handy, and never tired of hearing him say, "i knew marmar would come," or seeing him lean down to kiss her, and put a plump berry into her mouth,"'cause he picked'em all for her."
the moon shone out just as they reached the avenue, and all the boys came shouting to meet them, so the lost lambs were borne in triumph and safety, and landed in the dining-room, where the unromantic little things demanded supper instead of preferring kisses and caresses.
they were set down to bread and milk, while the entire household stood round to gaze upon them.
nan soon recovered her spirits, and recounted her perils with a relish now that they were all over.
rob seemed absorbed in his food, but put down his spoon all of a sudden, and set up a doleful roar.
""my precious, why do you cry?"
asked his mother, who still hung over him.
""i'm crying'cause i was lost," bawled rob, trying to squeeze out a tear, and failing entirely.
""but you are found now.
nan says you did n't cry out in the field, and i was glad you were such a brave boy."
""i was so busy being frightened i did n't have any time then.
but i want to cry now,'cause i do n't like to be lost," explained rob, struggling with sleep, emotion, and a mouthful of bread and milk.
the boys set up such a laugh at this funny way of making up for lost time, that rob stopped to look at them, and the merriment was so infectious, that after a surprised stare he burst out into a merry, "ha, ha!"
and beat his spoon upon the table as if he enjoyed the joke immensely.
""it is ten o'clock; into bed, every man of you," said mr. bhaer, looking at his watch.
""and, thank heaven!
there will be no empty ones to-night," added mrs. bhaer, watching, with full eyes, robby going up in his father's arms, and nan escorted by daisy and demi, who considered her the most interesting heroine of their collection.
""poor aunt jo is so tired she ought to be carried up herself," said gentle franz, putting his arm round her as she paused at the stair-foot, looking quite exhausted by her fright and long walk.
""let's make an arm-chair," proposed tommy.
""no, thank you, my lads; but somebody may lend me a shoulder to lean on," answered mrs. jo.
""me!
me!"
and half-a-dozen jostled one another, all eager to be chosen, for there was something in the pale motherly face that touched the warm hearts under the round jackets.
seeing that they considered it an honor, mrs. jo gave it to the one who had earned it, and nobody grumbled when she put her arm on dan's broad shoulder, saying, with a look that made him color up with pride and pleasure, "he found the children; so i think he must help me up."
dan felt richly rewarded for his evening's work, not only that he was chosen from all the rest to go proudly up bearing the lamp, but because mrs. jo said heartily, "good-night, my boy!
god bless you!"
as he left her at her door.
""i wish i was your boy," said dan, who felt as if danger and trouble had somehow brought him nearer than ever to her.
""you shall be my oldest son," and she sealed her promise with a kiss that made dan hers entirely.
little rob was all right next day, but nan had a headache, and lay on mother bhaer's sofa with cold-cream upon her scratched face.
her remorse was quite gone, and she evidently thought being lost rather a fine amusement.
mrs. jo was not pleased with this state of things, and had no desire to have her children led from the paths of virtue, or her pupils lying round loose in huckleberry fields.
so she talked soberly to nan, and tried to impress upon her mind the difference between liberty and license, telling several tales to enforce her lecture.
she had not decided how to punish nan, but one of these stories suggested a way, and as mrs. jo liked odd penalties, she tried it.
""all children run away," pleaded nan, as if it was as natural and necessary a thing as measles or hooping cough.
""not all, and some who do run away do n't get found again," answered mrs. jo.
""did n't you do it yourself?"
asked nan, whose keen little eyes saw some traces of a kindred spirit in the serious lady who was sewing so morally before her.
mrs. jo laughed, and owned that she did.
""tell about it," demanded nan, feeling that she was getting the upper hand in the discussion.
mrs. jo saw that, and sobered down at once, saying, with a remorseful shake of the head, "i did it a good many times, and led my poor mother rather a hard life with my pranks, till she cured me."
""how?"
and nan sat up with a face full of interest.
""i had a new pair of shoes once, and wanted to show them; so, though i was told not to leave the garden, i ran away and was wandering about all day.
it was in the city, and why i was n't killed i do n't know.
such a time as i had.
i frolicked in the park with dogs, sailed boats in the back bay with strange boys, dined with a little irish beggar-girl on salt fish and potatoes, and was found at last fast asleep on a door-step with my arms round a great dog.
it was late in the evening, and i was a dirty as a little pig, and the new shoes were worn out i had travelled so far."
""how nice!"
cried nan, looking all ready to go and do it herself.
""it was not nice next day;" and mrs. jo tried to keep her eyes from betraying how much she enjoyed the memory of her early capers.
""did your mother whip you?"
asked nan, curiously.
""she never whipped me but once, and then she begged my pardon, or i do n't think i ever should have forgiven her, it hurt my feelings so much."
""why did she beg your pardon?
my father do n't."
""because, when she had done it, i turned round and said, "well, you are mad yourself, and ought to be whipped as much as me."
she looked at me a minute, then her anger all died out, and she said, as if ashamed, "you are right, jo, i am angry; and why should i punish you for being in a passion when i set you such a bad example?
forgive me, dear, and let us try to help one another in a better way."
i never forgot it, and it did me more good than a dozen rods."
nan sat thoughtfully turning the little cold-cream jar for a minute, and mrs. jo said nothing, but let that idea get well into the busy little mind that was so quick to see and feel what went on about her.
""i like that," said nan, presently, and her face looked less elfish, with its sharp eyes, inquisitive nose, and mischievous mouth.
""what did your mother do to you when you ran away that time?"
""she tied me to the bed-post with a long string, so that i could not go out of the room, and there i stayed all day with the little worn-out shoes hanging up before me to remind me of my fault."
""i should think that would cure anybody," cried nan, who loved her liberty above all things.
""it did cure me, and i think it will you, so i am going to try it," said mrs. jo, suddenly taking a ball of strong twine out of a drawer in her work-table.
nan looked as if she was decidedly getting the worst of the argument now, and sat feeling much crestfallen while mrs. jo tied one end round her waist and the other to the arm of the sofa, saying, as she finished, "i do n't like to tie you up like a naughty little dog, but if you do n't remember any better than a dog, i must treat you like one."
""i'd just as lief be tied up as not i like to play dog;" and nan put on a do n't - care face, and began to growl and grovel on the floor.
mrs. jo took no notice, but leaving a book or two and a handkerchief to hem, she went away, and left miss nan to her own devices.
this was not agreeable, and after sitting a moment she tried to untie the cord.
but it was fastened in the belt of her apron behind, so she began on the knot at the other end.
it soon came loose, and, gathering it up, nan was about to get out of the window, when she heard mrs. jo say to somebody as she passed through the hall, "no, i do n't think she will run away now; she is an honorable little girl, and knows that i do it to help her."
in a minute, nan whisked back, tied herself up, and began to sew violently.
rob came in a moment after, and was so charmed with the new punishment, that he got a jump-rope and tethered himself to the other arm of the sofa in the most social manner.
""i got lost too, so i ought to be tied up as much as nan," he explained to his mother when she saw the new captive.
""i'm not sure that you do n't deserve a little punishment, for you knew it was wrong to go far away from the rest."
""nan took me," began rob, willing to enjoy the novel penalty, but not willing to take the blame.
""you need n't have gone.
you have got a conscience, though you are a little boy, and you must learn to mind it."
""well, my conscience did n't prick me a bit when she said "let's get over the wall,"" answered rob, quoting one of demi's expressions.
""did you stop to see if it did?"
""no."
""then you can not tell."
""i guess it's such a little conscience that it do n't prick hard enough for me to feel it," added rob, after thinking the matter over for a minute.
""we must sharpen it up.
it's bad to have a dull conscience; so you may stay here till dinner-time, and talk about it with nan.
i trust you both not to untie yourselves till i say the word."
""no, we wo n't," said both, feeling a certain sense of virtue in helping to punish themselves.
for an hour they were very good, then they grew tired of one room, and longed to get out.
never had the hall seemed so inviting; even the little bedroom acquired a sudden interest, and they would gladly have gone in and played tent with the curtains of the best bed.
the open windows drove them wild because they could not reach them; and the outer world seemed so beautiful, they wondered how they ever found the heart to say it was dull.
nan pined for a race round the lawn, and rob remembered with dismay that he had not fed his dog that morning, and wondered what poor pollux would do.
they watched the clock, and nan did some nice calculations in minutes and seconds, while rob learned to tell all the hours between eight and one so well that he never forgot them.
it was maddening to smell the dinner, to know that there was to be succotash and huckleberry pudding, and to feel that they would not be on the spot to secure good helps of both.
when mary ann began to set the table, they nearly cut themselves in two trying to see what meat there was to be; and nan offered to help her make the beds, if she would only see that she had "lots of sauce on her pudding."
when the boys came bursting out of school, they found the children tugging at their halters like a pair of restive little colts, and were much edified, as well as amused, by the sequel to the exciting adventures of the night.
""untie me now, marmar; my conscience will prick like a pin next time, i know it will," said rob, as the bell rang, and teddy came to look at him with sorrowful surprise.
""we shall see," answered his mother, setting him free.
he took a good run down the hall, back through the dining-room, and brought up beside nan, quite beaming with virtuous satisfaction.
""i'll bring her dinner to her, may i?"
he asked, pitying his fellow-captive.
""that's my kind little son!
yes, pull out the table, and get a chair;" and mrs. jo hurried away to quell the ardor of the others, who were always in a raging state of hunger at noon.
nan ate alone, and spent a long afternoon attached to the sofa.
mrs. bhaer lengthened her bonds so that she could look out of the window; and there she stood watching the boys play, and all the little summer creatures enjoying their liberty.
daisy had a picnic for the dolls on the lawn, so that nan might see the fun if she could not join in it.
tommy turned his best somersaults to console her; demi sat on the steps reading aloud to himself, which amused nan a good deal; and dan brought a little tree-toad to show her as the most delicate attention in his power.
but nothing atoned for the loss of freedom; and a few hours of confinement taught nan how precious it was.
a good many thoughts went through the little head that lay on the window-sill during the last quiet hour when all the children went to the brook to see emil's new ship launched.
she was to have christened it, and had depended on smashing a tiny bottle of currant-wine over the prow as it was named josephine in honor of mrs. bhaer.
now she had lost her chance, and daisy would n't do it half so well.
tears rose to her eyes as she remembered that it was all her own fault; and she said aloud, addressing a fat bee who was rolling about in the yellow heart of a rose just under the window, "if you have run away, you'd better go right home, and tell your mother you are sorry, and never do so any more."
""i am glad to hear you give him such good advice, and i think he has taken it," said mrs. jo, smiling, as the bee spread his dusty wings and flew away.
nan brushed off a bright drop or two that shone on the window-sill, and nestled against her friend as she took her on her knee, adding kindly for she had seen the little drops, and knew what they meant, "do you think my mother's cure for running away a good one?"
""yes, ma'am," answered nan, quite subdued by her quiet day.
""i hope i shall not have to try it again."
""i guess not;" and nan looked up with such an earnest little face that mrs. jo felt satisfied, and said no more, for she liked to have her penalties do their own work, and did not spoil the effect by too much moralizing.
here rob appeared, bearing with infinite care what asia called a "sarcer pie," meaning one baked in a saucer.
""it's made out of some of my berries, and i'm going to give you half at supper-time," he announced with a flourish.
""what makes you, when i'm so naughty?"
asked nan, meekly.
""because we got lost together.
you ai n't going to be naughty again, are you?"
""never," said nan, with great decision.
""oh, goody!
now let's go and get mary ann to cut this for us all ready to eat; it's "most tea time;" and rob beckoned with the delicious little pie.
nan started to follow, then stopped, and said, "i forgot, i ca n't go."
""try and see," said mrs. bhaer, who had quietly untied the cord sash while she had been talking.
nan saw that she was free, and with one tempestuous kiss to mrs. jo, she was off like a humming-bird, followed by robby, dribbling huckleberry juice as he ran.
chapter xiii.
goldilocks after the last excitement peace descended upon plumfield and reigned unbroken for several weeks, for the elder boys felt that the loss of nan and rob lay at their door, and all became so paternal in their care that they were rather wearying; while the little ones listened to nan's recital of her perils so many times, that they regarded being lost as the greatest ill humanity was heir to, and hardly dared to put their little noses outside the great gate lest night should suddenly descend upon them, and ghostly black cows come looming through the dusk.
""it is too good to last," said mrs. jo; for years of boy-culture had taught her that such lulls were usually followed by outbreaks of some sort, and when less wise women would have thought that the boys had become confirmed saints, she prepared herself for a sudden eruption of the domestic volcano.
one cause of this welcome calm was a visit from little bess, whose parents lent her for a week while they were away with grandpa laurence, who was poorly.
the boys regarded goldilocks as a mixture of child, angel, and fairy, for she was a lovely little creature, and the golden hair which she inherited from her blonde mamma enveloped her like a shining veil, behind which she smiled upon her worshippers when gracious, and hid herself when offended.
her father would not have it cut and it hung below her waist, so soft and fine and bright, that demi insisted that it was silk spun from a cocoon.
every one praised the little princess, but it did not seem to do her harm, only to teach her that her presence brought sunshine, her smiles made answering smiles on other faces, and her baby griefs filled every heart with tenderest sympathy.
unconsciously, she did her young subjects more good than many a real sovereign, for her rule was very gentle and her power was felt rather than seen.
her natural refinement made her dainty in all things, and had a good effect upon the careless lads about her.
she would let no one touch her roughly or with unclean hands, and more soap was used during her visits than at any other time, because the boys considered it the highest honor to be allowed to carry her highness, and the deepest disgrace to be repulsed with the disdainful command, "do away, dirty boy!"
lour voices displeased her and quarrelling frightened her; so gentler tones came into the boyish voices as they addressed her, and squabbles were promptly suppressed in her presence by lookers-on if the principles could not restrain themselves.
she liked to be waited on, and the biggest boys did her little errands without a murmur, while the small lads were her devoted slaves in all things.
they begged to be allowed to draw her carriage, bear her berry-basket, or pass her plate at table.
no service was too humble, and tommy and ned came to blows before they could decide which should have the honor of blacking her little boots.
nan was especially benefited by a week in the society of a well-bred lady, though such a very small one; for bess would look at her with a mixture of wonder and alarm in her great blue eyes when the hoyden screamed and romped; and she shrunk from her as if she thought her a sort of wild animal.
warm-hearted nan felt this very much.
she said at first, "pooh!
i do n't care!"
but she did care, and was so hurt when bess said, "i love my tuzzin best, tause she is twiet," that she shook poor daisy till her teeth chattered in her head, and then fled to the barn to cry dismally.
in that general refuge for perturbed spirits she found comfort and good counsel from some source or other.
perhaps the swallows from their mud-built nests overhead twittered her a little lecture on the beauty of gentleness.
however that might have been, she came out quite subdued, and carefully searched the orchard for a certain kind of early apple that bess liked because it was sweet and small and rosy.
armed with this peace-offering, she approached the little princess, and humbly presented it.
to her great joy it was graciously accepted, and when daisy gave nan a forgiving kiss, bess did likewise, as if she felt that she had been too severe, and desired to apologize.
after this they played pleasantly together, and nan enjoyed the royal favor for days.
to be sure she felt a little like a wild bird in a pretty cage at first, and occasionally had to slip out to stretch her wings in a long flight, or to sing at the top of her voice, where neither would disturb the plump turtle-dove daisy, nor the dainty golden canary bess.
but it did her good; for, seeing how every one loved the little princess for her small graces and virtues, she began to imitate her, because nan wanted much love, and tried hard to win it.
not a boy in the house but felt the pretty child's influence, and was improved by it without exactly knowing how or why, for babies can work miracles in the hearts that love them.
poor billy found infinite satisfaction in staring at her, and though she did not like it she permitted without a frown, after she had been made to understand that he was not quite like the others, and on that account must be more kindly treated.
dick and dolly overwhelmed her with willow whistles, the only thing they knew how to make, and she accepted but never used them.
rob served her like a little lover, and teddy followed her like a pet dog.
jack she did not like, because he was afflicted with warts and had a harsh voice.
stuffy displeased her because he did not eat tidily, and george tried hard not to gobble, that he might not disgust the dainty little lady opposite.
ned was banished from court in utter disgrace when he was discovered tormenting some unhappy field-mice.
goldilocks could never forget the sad spectacle, and retired behind her veil when he approached, waving him away with an imperious little hand, and crying, in a tone of mingled grief and anger, "no, i tar n't love him; he tut the poor mouses" little tails off, and they queeked!"
daisy promptly abdicated when bess came, and took the humble post of chief cook, while nan was first maid of honor; emil was chancellor of the exchequer, and spent the public monies lavishly in getting up spectacles that cost whole ninepences.
franz was prime minister, and directed her affairs of state, planned royal progresses through the kingdom, and kept foreign powers in order.
demi was her philosopher, and fared much better than such gentlemen usually do among crowned heads.
dan was her standing army, and defended her territories gallantly; tommy was court fool, and nat a tuneful rizzio to this innocent little mary.
uncle fritz and aunt jo enjoyed this peaceful episode, and looked on at the pretty play in which the young folk unconsciously imitated their elders, without adding the tragedy that is so apt to spoil the dramas acted on the larger stage.
""they teach us quite as much as we teach them," said mr. bhaer.
""bless the dears!
they never guess how many hints they give us as to the best way of managing them," answered mrs. jo.
""i think you were right about the good effect of having girls among the boys.
nan has stirred up daisy, and bess is teaching the little bears how to behave better than we can.
if this reformation goes on as it has begun, i shall soon feel like dr. blimber with his model young gentlemen," said professor, laughing, as he saw tommy not only remove his own hat, but knock off ned's also, as they entered the hall where the princess was taking a ride on the rocking-horse, attended by rob and teddy astride of chairs, and playing gallant knights to the best of their ability.
""you will never be a blimber, fritz, you could n't do it if you tried; and our boys will never submit to the forcing process of that famous hot-bed.
no fear that they will be too elegant: american boys like liberty too well.
but good manners they can not fail to have, if we give them the kindly spirit that shines through the simplest demeanor, making it courteous and cordial, like yours, my dear old boy."
""tut!
tut!
we will not compliment; for if i begin you will run away, and i have a wish to enjoy this happy half hour to the end;" yet mr. bhaer looked pleased with the compliment, for it was true, and mrs. jo felt that she had received the best her husband could give her, by saying that he found his truest rest and happiness in her society.
""to return to the children: i have just had another proof of goldilocks" good influence," said mrs. jo, drawing her chair nearer the sofa, where the professor lay resting after a long day's work in his various gardens.
""nan hates sewing, but for love of bess has been toiling half the afternoon over a remarkable bag in which to present a dozen of our love-apples to her idol when she goes.
i praised her for it, and she said, in her quick way," i like to sew for other people; it is stupid sewing for myself."
i took the hint, and shall give her some little shirts and aprons for mrs. carney's children.
she is so generous, she will sew her fingers sore for them, and i shall not have to make a task of it."
""but needlework is not a fashionable accomplishment, my dear."
""sorry for it.
my girls shall learn all i can teach them about it, even if they give up the latin, algebra, and half-a-dozen ologies it is considered necessary for girls to muddle their poor brains over now-a-days.
amy means to make bess an accomplished woman, but the dear's mite of a forefinger has little pricks on it already, and her mother has several specimens of needlework which she values more than the clay bird without a bill, that filled laurie with such pride when bess made it."
""i also have proof of the princess's power," said mrs. bhaer, after he had watched mrs. jo sew on a button with an air of scorn for the whole system of fashionable education.
""jack is so unwilling to be classed with stuffy and ned, as distasteful to bess, that he came to me a little while ago, and asked me to touch his warts with caustic.
i have often proposed it, and he never would consent; but now he bore the smart manfully, and consoles his present discomfort by hopes of future favor, when he can show her fastidious ladyship a smooth hand."
mrs. bhaer laughed at the story, and just then stuffy came in to ask if he might give goldilocks some of the bonbons his mother had sent him.
""she is not allowed to eat sweeties; but if you like to give her the pretty box with the pink sugar-rose in it, she would like it very much," said mrs. jo, unwilling to spoil this unusual piece of self-denial, for the "fat boy" seldom offered to share his sugar-plums.
""wo n't she eat it?
i should n't like to make her sick," said stuffy, eyeing the delicate sweetmeat lovingly, yet putting it into the box.
""oh, no, she wo n't touch it, if i tell her it is to look at, not to eat.
she will keep it for weeks, and never think of tasting it.
can you do as much?"
""i should hope so!
i'm ever so much older than she is," cried stuffy, indignantly.
""well, suppose we try.
here, put your bonbons in this bag, and see how long you can keep them.
let me count two hearts, four red fishes, three barley-sugar horses, nine almonds, and a dozen chocolate drops.
do you agree to that?"
asked sly mrs. jo, popping the sweeties into her little spool-bag.
""yes," said stuffy, with a sigh; and pocketing the forbidden fruit, he went away to give bess the present, that won a smile from her, and permission to escort her round the garden.
""poor stuffy's heart has really got the better of his stomach at last, and his efforts will be much encouraged by the rewards bess gives him," said mrs. jo.
""happy is the man who can put temptation in his pocket and learn self-denial from so sweet a little teacher!"
added mr. bhaer, as the children passed the window, stuffy's fat face full of placid satisfaction, and goldilocks surveying her sugar-rose with polite interest, though she would have preferred a real flower with a "pitty smell."
when her father came to take her home, a universal wail arose, and the parting gifts showered upon her increased her luggage to such an extent that mr. laurie proposed having out the big wagon to take it into town.
every one had given her something; and it was found difficult to pack white mice, cake, a parcel of shells, apples, a rabbit kicking violently in a bag, a large cabbage for his refreshment, a bottle of minnows, and a mammoth bouquet.
the farewell scene was moving, for the princess sat upon the hall-table, surrounded by her subjects.
she kissed her cousins, and held out her hand to the other boys, who shook it gently with various soft speeches, for they were taught not to be ashamed of showing their emotions.
""come again soon, little dear," whispered dan, fastening his best green-and-gold beetle in her hat.
""do n't forget me, princess, whatever you do," said the engaging tommy, taking a last stroke of the pretty hair.
""i am coming to your house next week, and then i shall see you, bess," added nat, as if he found consolation in the thought.
""do shake hands now," cried jack, offering a smooth paw.
""here are two nice new ones to remember us by," said dick and dolly, presenting fresh whistles, quite unconscious that seven old ones had been privately deposited in the kitchen-stove.
""my little precious!
i shall work you a book-mark right away, and you must keep it always," said nan, with a warm embrace.
but of all the farewells, poor billy's was the most pathetic, for the thought that she was really going became so unbearable that he cast himself down before her, hugging her little blue boots and blubbering despairingly, "do n't go away!
oh, do n't!"
goldilocks was so touched by this burst of feeling, that she leaned over and lifting the poor lad's head, said, in her soft, little voice, "do n't cry, poor billy!
i will tiss you and tum adain soon."
this promise consoled billy, and he fell back beaming with pride at the unusual honor conferred upon him.
""me too!
me too!"
clamored dick and dolly, feeling that their devotion deserved some return.
the others looked as if they would like to join in the cry; and something in the kind, merry faces about her moved the princess to stretch out her arms and say, with reckless condescension, "i will tiss evvybody!"
like a swarm of bees about a very sweet flower, the affectionate lads surrounded their pretty playmate, and kissed her till she looked like a little rose, not roughly, but so enthusiastically that nothing but the crown of her hat was visible for a moment.
then her father rescued her, and she drove away still smiling and waving her hands, while the boys sat on the fence screaming like a flock of guinea-fowls, "come back!
come back!"
till she was out of sight.
they all missed her, and each dimly felt that he was better for having known a creature so lovely, delicate, and sweet; for little bess appealed to the chivalrous instinct in them as something to love, admire, and protect with a tender sort of reverence.
many a man remembers some pretty child who has made a place in his heart and kept her memory alive by the simple magic of her innocence; these little men were just learning to feel this power, and to love it for its gentle influence, not ashamed to let the small hand lead them, nor to own their loyalty to womankind, even in the bud.
chapter xiv.
damon and pythias mrs. bhaer was right; peace was only a temporary lull, a storm was brewing, and two days after bess left, a moral earthquake shook plumfield to its centre.
tommy's hens were at the bottom of the trouble, for if they had not persisted in laying so many eggs, he could not have sold them and made such sums.
money is the root of all evil, and yet it is such a useful root that we can not get on without it any more than we can without potatoes.
tommy certainly could not, for he spent his income so recklessly, that mr. bhaer was obliged to insist on a savings-bank, and presented him with a private one an imposing tin edifice, with the name over the door, and a tall chimney, down which the pennies were to go, there to rattle temptingly till leave was given to open a sort of trap-door in the floor.
the house increased in weight so rapidly, that tommy soon became satisfied with his investment, and planned to buy unheard-of treasures with his capital.
he kept account of the sums deposited, and was promised that he might break the bank as soon as he had five dollars, on condition that he spent the money wisely.
only one dollar was needed, and the day mrs. jo paid him for four dozen eggs, he was so delighted, that he raced off to the barn to display the bright quarters to nat, who was also laying by money for the long-desired violin.
""i wish i had'em to put with my three dollars, then i'd soon get enough to buy my fiddle," he said, looking wistfully at the money.
""p'raps i'll lend you some.
i have n't decided yet what i'll do with mine," said tommy, tossing up his quarters and catching them as they fell.
""hi!
boys!
come down to the brook and see what a jolly great snake dan's got!"
called a voice from behind the barn.
""come on," said tommy; and, laying his money inside the old winnowing machine, away he ran, followed by nat.
the snake was very interesting, and then a long chase after a lame crow, and its capture, so absorbed tommy's mind and time, that he never thought of his money till he was safely in bed that night.
""never mind, no one but nat knows where it is," said the easy-going lad, and fell asleep untroubled by any anxiety about his property.
next morning, just as the boys assembled for school, tommy rushed into the room breathlessly, demanding, "i say, who has got my dollar?"
""what are you talking about?"
asked franz.
tommy explained, and nat corroborated his statement.
every one else declared they knew nothing about it, and began to look suspiciously at nat, who got more and more alarmed and confused with each denial.
""somebody must have taken it," said franz, as tommy shook his fist at the whole party, and wrathfully declared that, "by thunder turtles!
if i get hold of the thief, i'll give him what he wo n't forget in a hurry."
""keep cool, tom; we shall find him out; thieves always come to grief," said dan, as one who knew something of the matter.
""may be some tramp slept in the barn and took it," suggested ned.
""no, silas do n't allow that; besides, a tramp would n't go looking in that old machine for money," said emil, with scorn.
""was n't it silas himself?"
said jack.
""well, i like that!
old si is as honest as daylight.
you would n't catch him touching a penny of ours," said tommy, handsomely defending his chief admirer from suspicion.
""whoever it was had better tell, and not wait to be found out," said demi, looking as if an awful misfortune had befallen the family.
""i know you think it's me," broke out nat, red and excited.
""you are the only one who knew where it was," said franz.
""i ca n't help it i did n't take it.
i tell you i did n't i did n't!"
cried nat, in a desperate sort of way.
""gently, gently, my son!
what is all this noise about?"
and mr. bhaer walked in among them.
tommy repeated the story of his loss, and, as he listened, mr. bhaer's face grew graver and graver; for, with all their faults and follies, the lads till now had been honest.
""take your seats," he said; and, when all were in their places, he added slowly, as his eye went from face to face with a grieved look, that was harder to bear than a storm of words, "now, boys, i shall ask each one of you a single question, and i want an honest answer.
i am not going to try to frighten, bribe, or surprise the truth out of you, for every one of you have got a conscience, and know what it is for.
now is the time to undo the wrong done to tommy, and set yourselves right before us all.
i can forgive the yielding to sudden temptation much easier than i can deceit.
do n't add a lie to the theft, but confess frankly, and we will all try to help you make us forget and forgive."
he paused a moment, and one might have heard a pin drop, the room was so still; then slowly and impressively he put the question to each one, receiving the same answer in varying tones from all.
there is really nothing at all but scenery."
""out of your world perhaps, susan -- but not out of mine," said anne with a faint smile.
""i do not quite understand you, mrs. doctor, dear, but of course i am not well educated.
but if dr. blythe buys the morgan place he will make no mistake, and that you may tie to.
they have water in it, and the pantries and closets are beautiful, and there is not another such cellar in p. e. island, so i have been told.
why, the cellar here, mrs. doctor, dear, has been a heart-break to me, as well you know."
""oh, go away, susan, go away," said anne forlornly.
""cellars and pantries and closets do n't make a home.
why do n't you weep with those who weep?"
""well, i never was much hand for weeping, mrs. doctor, dear.
i would rather fall to and cheer people up than weep with them.
now, do not you cry and spoil your pretty eyes.
this house is very well and has served your turn, but it is high time you had a better."
susan's point of view seemed to be that of most people.
leslie was the only one who sympathised understandingly with anne.
she had a good cry, too, when she heard the news.
then they both dried their tears and went to work at the preparations for moving.
""since we must go let us go as soon as we can and have it over," said poor anne with bitter resignation.
""you know you will like that lovely old place at the glen after you have lived in it long enough to have dear memories woven about it," said leslie.
""friends will come there, as they have come here -- happiness will glorify it for you.
now, it's just a house to you -- but the years will make it a home."
anne and leslie had another cry the next week when they shortened little jem.
anne felt the tragedy of it until evening when in his long nightie she found her own dear baby again.
""but it will be rompers next -- and then trousers -- and in no time he will be grown-up," she sighed.
""well, you would not want him to stay a baby always, mrs. doctor, dear, would you?"
said susan.
""bless his innocent heart, he looks too sweet for anything in his little short dresses, with his dear feet sticking out.
and think of the save in the ironing, mrs. doctor, dear."
""anne, i have just had a letter from owen," said leslie, entering with a bright face.
""and, oh!
i have such good news.
he writes me that he is going to buy this place from the church trustees and keep it to spend our summer vacations in.
anne, are you not glad?"
""oh, leslie, "glad" is n't the word for it!
it seems almost too good to be true.
i sha'n' t feel half so badly now that i know this dear spot will never be desecrated by a vandal tribe, or left to tumble down in decay.
why, it's lovely!
it's lovely!"
one october morning anne wakened to the realisation that she had slept for the last time under the roof of her little house.
the day was too busy to indulge regret and when evening came the house was stripped and bare.
anne and gilbert were alone in it to say farewell.
leslie and susan and little jem had gone to the glen with the last load of furniture.
the sunset light streamed in through the curtainless windows.
""it has all such a heart-broken, reproachful look, has n't it?"
said anne.
""oh, i shall be so homesick at the glen tonight!"
""we have been very happy here, have n't we, anne-girl?"
said gilbert, his voice full of feeling.
anne choked, unable to answer.
gilbert waited for her at the fir-tree gate, while she went over the house and said farewell to every room.
she was going away; but the old house would still be there, looking seaward through its quaint windows.
the autumn winds would blow around it mournfully, and the gray rain would beat upon it and the white mists would come in from the sea to enfold it; and the moonlight would fall over it and light up the old paths where the schoolmaster and his bride had walked.
there on that old harbor shore the charm of story would linger; the wind would still whistle alluringly over the silver sand-dunes; the waves would still call from the red rock-coves.
""but we will be gone," said anne through her tears.
she went out, closing and locking the door behind her.
gilbert was waiting for her with a smile.
the lighthouse star was gleaming northward.
the little garden, where only marigolds still bloomed, was already hooding itself in shadows.
anne knelt down and kissed the worn old step which she had crossed as a bride.
_book_title_: lucy_maud_montgomery___anne_of_avonlea.txt.out
i an irate neighbor a tall, slim girl, "half-past sixteen," with serious gray eyes and hair which her friends called auburn, had sat down on the broad red sandstone doorstep of a prince edward island farmhouse one ripe afternoon in august, firmly resolved to construe so many lines of virgil.
but an august afternoon, with blue hazes scarfing the harvest slopes, little winds whispering elfishly in the poplars, and a dancing slendor of red poppies outflaming against the dark coppice of young firs in a corner of the cherry orchard, was fitter for dreams than dead languages.
the virgil soon slipped unheeded to the ground, and anne, her chin propped on her clasped hands, and her eyes on the splendid mass of fluffy clouds that were heaping up just over mr. j. a. harrison's house like a great white mountain, was far away in a delicious world where a certain schoolteacher was doing a wonderful work, shaping the destinies of future statesmen, and inspiring youthful minds and hearts with high and lofty ambitions.
to be sure, if you came down to harsh facts... which, it must be confessed, anne seldom did until she had to... it did not seem likely that there was much promising material for celebrities in avonlea school; but you could never tell what might happen if a teacher used her influence for good.
anne had certain rose-tinted ideals of what a teacher might accomplish if she only went the right way about it; and she was in the midst of a delightful scene, forty years hence, with a famous personage... just exactly what he was to be famous for was left in convenient haziness, but anne thought it would be rather nice to have him a college president or a canadian premier... bowing low over her wrinkled hand and assuring her that it was she who had first kindled his ambition, and that all his success in life was due to the lessons she had instilled so long ago in avonlea school.
this pleasant vision was shattered by a most unpleasant interruption.
a demure little jersey cow came scuttling down the lane and five seconds later mr. harrison arrived... if "arrived" be not too mild a term to describe the manner of his irruption into the yard.
he bounced over the fence without waiting to open the gate, and angrily confronted astonished anne, who had risen to her feet and stood looking at him in some bewilderment.
mr. harrison was their new righthand neighbor and she had never met him before, although she had seen him once or twice.
in early april, before anne had come home from queen's, mr. robert bell, whose farm adjoined the cuthbert place on the west, had sold out and moved to charlottetown.
his farm had been bought by a certain mr. j. a. harrison, whose name, and the fact that he was a new brunswick man, were all that was known about him.
but before he had been a month in avonlea he had won the reputation of being an odd person... "a crank," mrs. rachel lynde said.
mrs. rachel was an outspoken lady, as those of you who may have already made her acquaintance will remember.
mr. harrison was certainly different from other people... and that is the essential characteristic of a crank, as everybody knows.
in the first place he kept house for himself and had publicly stated that he wanted no fools of women around his diggings.
feminine avonlea took its revenge by the gruesome tales it related about his house-keeping and cooking.
he had hired little john henry carter of white sands and john henry started the stories.
for one thing, there was never any stated time for meals in the harrison establishment.
mr. harrison "got a bite" when he felt hungry, and if john henry were around at the time, he came in for a share, but if he were not, he had to wait until mr. harrison's next hungry spell.
john henry mournfully averred that he would have starved to death if it was n't that he got home on sundays and got a good filling up, and that his mother always gave him a basket of "grub" to take back with him on monday mornings.
as for washing dishes, mr. harrison never made any pretence of doing it unless a rainy sunday came.
then he went to work and washed them all at once in the rainwater hogshead, and left them to drain dry.
again, mr. harrison was "close."
when he was asked to subscribe to the rev. mr. allan's salary he said he'd wait and see how many dollars" worth of good he got out of his preaching first... he did n't believe in buying a pig in a poke.
and when mrs. lynde went to ask for a contribution to missions... and incidentally to see the inside of the house... he told her there were more heathens among the old woman gossips in avonlea than anywhere else he knew of, and he'd cheerfully contribute to a mission for christianizing them if she'd undertake it.
mrs. rachel got herself away and said it was a mercy poor mrs. robert bell was safe in her grave, for it would have broken her heart to see the state of her house in which she used to take so much pride.
""why, she scrubbed the kitchen floor every second day," mrs. lynde told marilla cuthbert indignantly, "and if you could see it now!
i had to hold up my skirts as i walked across it."
finally, mr. harrison kept a parrot called ginger.
nobody in avonlea had ever kept a parrot before; consequently that proceeding was considered barely respectable.
and such a parrot!
if you took john henry carter's word for it, never was such an unholy bird.
it swore terribly.
mrs. carter would have taken john henry away at once if she had been sure she could get another place for him.
besides, ginger had bitten a piece right out of the back of john henry's neck one day when he had stooped down too near the cage.
mrs. carter showed everybody the mark when the luckless john henry went home on sundays.
all these things flashed through anne's mind as mr. harrison stood, quite speechless with wrath apparently, before her.
in his most amiable mood mr. harrison could not have been considered a handsome man; he was short and fat and bald; and now, with his round face purple with rage and his prominent blue eyes almost sticking out of his head, anne thought he was really the ugliest person she had ever seen.
all at once mr. harrison found his voice.
""i'm not going to put up with this," he spluttered, "not a day longer, do you hear, miss.
bless my soul, this is the third time, miss... the third time!
patience has ceased to be a virtue, miss.
i warned your aunt the last time not to let it occur again... and she's let it... she's done it... what does she mean by it, that is what i want to know.
that is what i'm here about, miss."
""will you explain what the trouble is?"
asked anne, in her most dignified manner.
she had been practicing it considerably of late to have it in good working order when school began; but it had no apparent effect on the irate j. a. harrison.
""trouble, is it?
bless my soul, trouble enough, i should think.
the trouble is, miss, that i found that jersey cow of your aunt's in my oats again, not half an hour ago.
the third time, mark you.
i found her in last tuesday and i found her in yesterday.
i came here and told your aunt not to let it occur again.
she has let it occur again.
where's your aunt, miss?
i just want to see her for a minute and give her a piece of my mind... a piece of j. a. harrison's mind, miss."
""if you mean miss marilla cuthbert, she is not my aunt, and she has gone down to east grafton to see a distant relative of hers who is very ill," said anne, with due increase of dignity at every word.
""i am very sorry that my cow should have broken into your oats... she is my cow and not miss cuthbert's... matthew gave her to me three years ago when she was a little calf and he bought her from mr. bell."
""sorry, miss!
sorry is n't going to help matters any.
you'd better go and look at the havoc that animal has made in my oats... trampled them from center to circumference, miss."
""i am very sorry," repeated anne firmly, "but perhaps if you kept your fences in better repair dolly might not have broken in.
it is your part of the line fence that separates your oatfield from our pasture and i noticed the other day that it was not in very good condition."
""my fence is all right," snapped mr. harrison, angrier than ever at this carrying of the war into the enemy's country.
""the jail fence could n't keep a demon of a cow like that out.
and i can tell you, you redheaded snippet, that if the cow is yours, as you say, you'd be better employed in watching her out of other people's grain than in sitting round reading yellow-covered novels,"... with a scathing glance at the innocent tan-colored virgil by anne's feet.
something at that moment was red besides anne's hair... which had always been a tender point with her.
""i'd rather have red hair than none at all, except a little fringe round my ears," she flashed.
the shot told, for mr. harrison was really very sensitive about his bald head.
his anger choked him up again and he could only glare speechlessly at anne, who recovered her temper and followed up her advantage.
""i can make allowance for you, mr. harrison, because i have an imagination.
i can easily imagine how very trying it must be to find a cow in your oats and i shall not cherish any hard feelings against you for the things you've said.
i promise you that dolly shall never break into your oats again.
i give you my word of honor on that point."
""well, mind you she does n't," muttered mr. harrison in a somewhat subdued tone; but he stamped off angrily enough and anne heard him growling to himself until he was out of earshot.
grievously disturbed in mind, anne marched across the yard and shut the naughty jersey up in the milking pen.
""she ca n't possibly get out of that unless she tears the fence down," she reflected.
""she looks pretty quiet now.
i daresay she has sickened herself on those oats.
i wish i'd sold her to mr. shearer when he wanted her last week, but i thought it was just as well to wait until we had the auction of the stock and let them all go together.
i believe it is true about mr. harrison being a crank.
certainly there's nothing of the kindred spirit about him."
anne had always a weather eye open for kindred spirits.
marilla cuthbert was driving into the yard as anne returned from the house, and the latter flew to get tea ready.
they discussed the matter at the tea table.
""i'll be glad when the auction is over," said marilla.
""it is too much responsibility having so much stock about the place and nobody but that unreliable martin to look after them.
he has never come back yet and he promised that he would certainly be back last night if i'd give him the day off to go to his aunt's funeral.
i do n't know how many aunts he has got, i am sure.
that's the fourth that's died since he hired here a year ago.
i'll be more than thankful when the crop is in and mr. barry takes over the farm.
we'll have to keep dolly shut up in the pen till martin comes, for she must be put in the back pasture and the fences there have to be fixed.
i declare, it is a world of trouble, as rachel says.
here's poor mary keith dying and what is to become of those two children of hers is more than i know.
she has a brother in british columbia and she has written to him about them, but she has n't heard from him yet."
""what are the children like?
how old are they?"
""six past... they're twins."
""oh, i've always been especially interested in twins ever since mrs. hammond had so many," said anne eagerly.
""are they pretty?"
""goodness, you could n't tell... they were too dirty.
davy had been out making mud pies and dora went out to call him in.
davy pushed her headfirst into the biggest pie and then, because she cried, he got into it himself and wallowed in it to show her it was nothing to cry about.
mary said dora was really a very good child but that davy was full of mischief.
he has never had any bringing up you might say.
his father died when he was a baby and mary has been sick almost ever since."
""i'm always sorry for children that have no bringing up," said anne soberly.
""you know i had n't any till you took me in hand.
i hope their uncle will look after them.
just what relation is mrs. keith to you?"
""mary?
none in the world.
it was her husband... he was our third cousin.
there's mrs. lynde coming through the yard.
i thought she'd be up to hear about mary."
""do n't tell her about mr. harrison and the cow," implored anne.
marilla promised; but the promise was quite unnecessary, for mrs. lynde was no sooner fairly seated than she said, "i saw mr. harrison chasing your jersey out of his oats today when i was coming home from carmody.
i thought he looked pretty mad.
did he make much of a rumpus?"
anne and marilla furtively exchanged amused smiles.
few things in avonlea ever escaped mrs. lynde.
it was only that morning anne had said, "if you went to your own room at midnight, locked the door, pulled down the blind, and sneezed, mrs. lynde would ask you the next day how your cold was!"
""i believe he did," admitted marilla.
""i was away.
he gave anne a piece of his mind."
""i think he is a very disagreeable man," said anne, with a resentful toss of her ruddy head.
""you never said a truer word," said mrs. rachel solemnly.
""i knew there'd be trouble when robert bell sold his place to a new brunswick man, that's what.
i do n't know what avonlea is coming to, with so many strange people rushing into it.
it'll soon not be safe to go to sleep in our beds."
""why, what other strangers are coming in?"
asked marilla.
""have n't you heard?
well, there's a family of donnells, for one thing.
they've rented peter sloane's old house.
peter has hired the man to run his mill.
they belong down east and nobody knows anything about them.
then that shiftless timothy cotton family are going to move up from white sands and they'll simply be a burden on the public.
he is in consumption... when he is n't stealing... and his wife is a slack-twisted creature that ca n't turn her hand to a thing.
she washes her dishes sitting down.
mrs. george pye has taken her husband's orphan nephew, anthony pye.
he'll be going to school to you, anne, so you may expect trouble, that's what.
and you'll have another strange pupil, too.
paul irving is coming from the states to live with his grandmother.
you remember his father, marilla... stephen irving, him that jilted lavendar lewis over at grafton?"
""i do n't think he jilted her.
there was a quarrel... i suppose there was blame on both sides."
""well, anyway, he did n't marry her, and she's been as queer as possible ever since, they say... living all by herself in that little stone house she calls echo lodge.
stephen went off to the states and went into business with his uncle and married a yankee.
he's never been home since, though his mother has been up to see him once or twice.
his wife died two years ago and he's sending the boy home to his mother for a spell.
he's ten years old and i do n't know if he'll be a very desirable pupil.
you can never tell about those yankees."
mrs lynde looked upon all people who had the misfortune to be born or brought up elsewhere than in prince edward island with a decided can-any-good-thing-come-out-of-nazareth air.
they might be good people, of course; but you were on the safe side in doubting it.
she had a special prejudice against "yankees."
her husband had been cheated out of ten dollars by an employer for whom he had once worked in boston and neither angels nor principalities nor powers could have convinced mrs. rachel that the whole united states was not responsible for it.
""avonlea school wo n't be the worse for a little new blood," said marilla drily, "and if this boy is anything like his father he'll be all right.
steve irving was the nicest boy that was ever raised in these parts, though some people did call him proud.
i should think mrs. irving would be very glad to have the child.
she has been very lonesome since her husband died."
""oh, the boy may be well enough, but he'll be different from avonlea children," said mrs. rachel, as if that clinched the matter.
mrs. rachel's opinions concerning any person, place, or thing, were always warranted to wear.
""what's this i hear about your going to start up a village improvement society, anne?"
""i was just talking it over with some of the girls and boys at the last debating club," said anne, flushing.
""they thought it would be rather nice... and so do mr. and mrs. allan.
lots of villages have them now."
""well, you'll get into no end of hot water if you do.
better leave it alone, anne, that's what.
people do n't like being improved."
""oh, we are not going to try to improve the people.
it is avonlea itself.
there are lots of things which might be done to make it prettier.
for instance, if we could coax mr. levi boulter to pull down that dreadful old house on his upper farm would n't that be an improvement?"
""it certainly would," admitted mrs. rachel.
""that old ruin has been an eyesore to the settlement for years.
but if you improvers can coax levi boulter to do anything for the public that he is n't to be paid for doing, may i be there to see and hear the process, that's what.
i do n't want to discourage you, anne, for there may be something in your idea, though i suppose you did get it out of some rubbishy yankee magazine; but you'll have your hands full with your school and i advise you as a friend not to bother with your improvements, that's what.
but there, i know you'll go ahead with it if you've set your mind on it.
you were always one to carry a thing through somehow."
something about the firm outlines of anne's lips told that mrs. rachel was not far astray in this estimate.
anne's heart was bent on forming the improvement society.
gilbert blythe, who was to teach in white sands but would always be home from friday night to monday morning, was enthusiastic about it; and most of the other folks were willing to go in for anything that meant occasional meetings and consequently some "fun."
as for what the "improvements" were to be, nobody had any very clear idea except anne and gilbert.
they had talked them over and planned them out until an ideal avonlea existed in their minds, if nowhere else.
mrs. rachel had still another item of news.
""they've given the carmody school to a priscilla grant.
did n't you go to queen's with a girl of that name, anne?"
""yes, indeed.
priscilla to teach at carmody!
how perfectly lovely!"
exclaimed anne, her gray eyes lighting up until they looked like evening stars, causing mrs. lynde to wonder anew if she would ever get it settled to her satisfaction whether anne shirley were really a pretty girl or not.
ii selling in haste and repenting at leisure anne drove over to carmody on a shopping expedition the next afternoon and took diana barry with her.
diana was, of course, a pledged member of the improvement society, and the two girls talked about little else all the way to carmody and back.
""the very first thing we ought to do when we get started is to have that hall painted," said diana, as they drove past the avonlea hall, a rather shabby building set down in a wooded hollow, with spruce trees hooding it about on all sides.
""it's a disgraceful looking place and we must attend to it even before we try to get mr. levi boulder to pull his house down.
father says we'll never succeed in doing that.
levi boulter is too mean to spend the time it would take."
""perhaps he'll let the boys take it down if they promise to haul the boards and split them up for him for kindling wood," said anne hopefully.
""we must do our best and be content to go slowly at first.
we ca n't expect to improve everything all at once.
we'll have to educate public sentiment first, of course."
diana was n't exactly sure what educating public sentiment meant; but it sounded fine and she felt rather proud that she was going to belong to a society with such an aim in view.
""i thought of something last night that we could do, anne.
you know that three-cornered piece of ground where the roads from carmody and newbridge and white sands meet?
it's all grown over with young spruce; but would n't it be nice to have them all cleared out, and just leave the two or three birch trees that are on it?"
""splendid," agreed anne gaily.
""and have a rustic seat put under the birches.
and when spring comes we'll have a flower-bed made in the middle of it and plant geraniums."
""yes; only we'll have to devise some way of getting old mrs. hiram sloane to keep her cow off the road, or she'll eat our geraniums up," laughed diana.
""i begin to see what you mean by educating public sentiment, anne.
there's the old boulter house now.
did you ever see such a rookery?
and perched right close to the road too.
an old house with its windows gone always makes me think of something dead with its eyes picked out."
""i think an old, deserted house is such a sad sight," said anne dreamily.
""it always seems to me to be thinking about its past and mourning for its old-time joys.
marilla says that a large family was raised in that old house long ago, and that it was a real pretty place, with a lovely garden and roses climbing all over it.
it was full of little children and laughter and songs; and now it is empty, and nothing ever wanders through it but the wind.
how lonely and sorrowful it must feel!
perhaps they all come back on moonlit nights... the ghosts of the little children of long ago and the roses and the songs... and for a little while the old house can dream it is young and joyous again."
diana shook her head.
""i never imagine things like that about places now, anne.
do n't you remember how cross mother and marilla were when we imagined ghosts into the haunted wood?
to this day i ca n't go through that bush comfortably after dark; and if i began imagining such things about the old boulter house i'd be frightened to pass it too.
besides, those children are n't dead.
they're all grown up and doing well... and one of them is a butcher.
and flowers and songs could n't have ghosts anyhow."
anne smothered a little sigh.
she loved diana dearly and they had always been good comrades.
but she had long ago learned that when she wandered into the realm of fancy she must go alone.
the way to it was by an enchanted path where not even her dearest might follow her.
a thunder-shower came up while the girls were at carmody; it did not last long, however, and the drive home, through lanes where the raindrops sparkled on the boughs and little leafy valleys where the drenched ferns gave out spicy odors, was delightful.
but just as they turned into the cuthbert lane anne saw something that spoiled the beauty of the landscape for her.
before them on the right extended mr. harrison's broad, gray-green field of late oats, wet and luxuriant; and there, standing squarely in the middle of it, up to her sleek sides in the lush growth, and blinking at them calmly over the intervening tassels, was a jersey cow!
anne dropped the reins and stood up with a tightening of the lips that boded no good to the predatory quadruped.
not a word said she, but she climbed nimbly down over the wheels, and whisked across the fence before diana understood what had happened.
""anne, come back," shrieked the latter, as soon as she found her voice.
""you'll ruin your dress in that wet grain... ruin it.
she does n't hear me!
well, she'll never get that cow out by herself.
i must go and help her, of course."
anne was charging through the grain like a mad thing.
diana hopped briskly down, tied the horse securely to a post, turned the skirt of her pretty gingham dress over her shoulders, mounted the fence, and started in pursuit of her frantic friend.
she could run faster than anne, who was hampered by her clinging and drenched skirt, and soon overtook her.
behind them they left a trail that would break mr. harrison's heart when he should see it.
""anne, for mercy's sake, stop," panted poor diana.
""i'm right out of breath and you are wet to the skin."
""i must... get... that cow... out... before... mr. harrison... sees her," gasped anne.
""i do n't... care... if i'm... drowned... if we... can... only... do that."
but the jersey cow appeared to see no good reason for being hustled out of her luscious browsing ground.
no sooner had the two breathless girls got near her than she turned and bolted squarely for the opposite corner of the field.
""head her off," screamed anne.
""run, diana, run."
diana did run.
anne tried to, and the wicked jersey went around the field as if she were possessed.
privately, diana thought she was.
it was fully ten minutes before they headed her off and drove her through the corner gap into the cuthbert lane.
there is no denying that anne was in anything but an angelic temper at that precise moment.
nor did it soothe her in the least to behold a buggy halted just outside the lane, wherein sat mr. shearer of carmody and his son, both of whom wore a broad smile.
""i guess you'd better have sold me that cow when i wanted to buy her last week, anne," chuckled mr. shearer.
""i'll sell her to you now, if you want her," said her flushed and disheveled owner.
""you may have her this very minute."
""done.
i'll give you twenty for her as i offered before, and jim here can drive her right over to carmody.
she'll go to town with the rest of the shipment this evening.
mr. reed of brighton wants a jersey cow."
five minutes later jim shearer and the jersey cow were marching up the road, and impulsive anne was driving along the green gables lane with her twenty dollars.
""what will marilla say?"
asked diana.
""oh, she wo n't care.
dolly was my own cow and it is n't likely she'd bring more than twenty dollars at the auction.
but oh dear, if mr. harrison sees that grain he will know she has been in again, and after my giving him my word of honor that i'd never let it happen!
well, it has taught me a lesson not to give my word of honor about cows.
a cow that could jump over or break through our milk-pen fence could n't be trusted anywhere."
marilla had gone down to mrs. lynde's, and when she returned knew all about dolly's sale and transfer, for mrs. lynde had seen most of the transaction from her window and guessed the rest.
""i suppose it's just as well she's gone, though you do do things in a dreadful headlong fashion, anne.
i do n't see how she got out of the pen, though.
she must have broken some of the boards off."
""i did n't think of looking," said anne, "but i'll go and see now.
martin has never come back yet.
perhaps some more of his aunts have died.
i think it's something like mr. peter sloane and the octogenarians.
the other evening mrs. sloane was reading a newspaper and she said to mr. sloane," i see here that another octogenarian has just died.
what is an octogenarian, peter?"
and mr. sloane said he did n't know, but they must be very sickly creatures, for you never heard tell of them but they were dying.
that's the way with martin's aunts."
""martin's just like all the rest of those french," said marilla in disgust.
""you ca n't depend on them for a day."
marilla was looking over anne's carmody purchases when she heard a shrill shriek in the barnyard.
a minute later anne dashed into the kitchen, wringing her hands.
""anne shirley, what's the matter now?"
""oh, marilla, whatever shall i do?
this is terrible.
and it's all my fault.
oh, will i ever learn to stop and reflect a little before doing reckless things?
mrs. lynde always told me i would do something dreadful some day, and now i've done it!"
""anne, you are the most exasperating girl!
what is it you've done?"
""sold mr. harrison's jersey cow... the one he bought from mr. bell... to mr. shearer!
dolly is out in the milking pen this very minute."
""anne shirley, are you dreaming?"
""i only wish i were.
there's no dream about it, though it's very like a nightmare.
and mr. harrison's cow is in charlottetown by this time.
oh, marilla, i thought i'd finished getting into scrapes, and here i am in the very worst one i ever was in in my life.
what can i do?"
""do?
there's nothing to do, child, except go and see mr. harrison about it.
we can offer him our jersey in exchange if he does n't want to take the money.
she is just as good as his."
""i'm sure he'll be awfully cross and disagreeable about it, though," moaned anne.
""i daresay he will.
he seems to be an irritable sort of a man.
i'll go and explain to him if you like."
""no, indeed, i'm not as mean as that," exclaimed anne.
""this is all my fault and i'm certainly not going to let you take my punishment.
i'll go myself and i'll go at once.
the sooner it's over the better, for it will be terribly humiliating."
poor anne got her hat and her twenty dollars and was passing out when she happened to glance through the open pantry door.
on the table reposed a nut cake which she had baked that morning... a particularly toothsome concoction iced with pink icing and adorned with walnuts.
anne had intended it for friday evening, when the youth of avonlea were to meet at green gables to organize the improvement society.
but what were they compared to the justly offended mr. harrison?
anne thought that cake ought to soften the heart of any man, especially one who had to do his own cooking, and she promptly popped it into a box.
she would take it to mr. harrison as a peace offering.
""that is, if he gives me a chance to say anything at all," she thought ruefully, as she climbed the lane fence and started on a short cut across the fields, golden in the light of the dreamy august evening.
""i know now just how people feel who are being led to execution."
iii mr. harrison at home mr. harrison's house was an old-fashioned, low-eaved, whitewashed structure, set against a thick spruce grove.
mr. harrison himself was sitting on his vineshaded veranda, in his shirt sleeves, enjoying his evening pipe.
when he realized who was coming up the path he sprang suddenly to his feet, bolted into the house, and shut the door.
this was merely the uncomfortable result of his surprise, mingled with a good deal of shame over his outburst of temper the day before.
but it nearly swept the remnant of her courage from anne's heart.
""if he's so cross now what will he be when he hears what i've done," she reflected miserably, as she rapped at the door.
but mr. harrison opened it, smiling sheepishly, and invited her to enter in a tone quite mild and friendly, if somewhat nervous.
he had laid aside his pipe and donned his coat; he offered anne a very dusty chair very politely, and her reception would have passed off pleasantly enough if it had not been for the telltale of a parrot who was peering through the bars of his cage with wicked golden eyes.
no sooner had anne seated herself than ginger exclaimed, "bless my soul, what's that redheaded snippet coming here for?"
it would be hard to say whose face was the redder, mr. harrison's or anne's.
""do n't you mind that parrot," said mr. harrison, casting a furious glance at ginger.
""he's... he's always talking nonsense.
i got him from my brother who was a sailor.
sailors do n't always use the choicest language, and parrots are very imitative birds."
""so i should think," said poor anne, the remembrance of her errand quelling her resentment.
she could n't afford to snub mr. harrison under the circumstances, that was certain.
when you had just sold a man's jersey cow offhand, without his knowledge or consent you must not mind if his parrot repeated uncomplimentary things.
nevertheless, the "redheaded snippet" was not quite so meek as she might otherwise have been.
""i've come to confess something to you, mr. harrison," she said resolutely.
""it's... it's about... that jersey cow."
""bless my soul," exclaimed mr. harrison nervously, "has she gone and broken into my oats again?
well, never mind... never mind if she has.
it's no difference... none at all, i... i was too hasty yesterday, that's a fact.
never mind if she has."
""oh, if it were only that," sighed anne.
""but it's ten times worse.
i do n't..." "bless my soul, do you mean to say she's got into my wheat?"
""no... no... not the wheat.
but..." "then it's the cabbages!
she's broken into my cabbages that i was raising for exhibition, hey?"
""it's not the cabbages, mr. harrison.
i'll tell you everything... that is what i came for -- but please do n't interrupt me.
it makes me so nervous.
just let me tell my story and do n't say anything till i get through -- and then no doubt you'll say plenty," anne concluded, but in thought only.
""i wo n't say another word," said mr. harrison, and he did n't.
but ginger was not bound by any contract of silence and kept ejaculating, "redheaded snippet" at intervals until anne felt quite wild.
""i shut my jersey cow up in our pen yesterday.
this morning i went to carmody and when i came back i saw a jersey cow in your oats.
diana and i chased her out and you ca n't imagine what a hard time we had.
i was so dreadfully wet and tired and vexed -- and mr. shearer came by that very minute and offered to buy the cow.
i sold her to him on the spot for twenty dollars.
it was wrong of me.
i should have waited and consulted marilla, of course.
but i'm dreadfully given to doing things without thinking -- everybody who knows me will tell you that.
mr. shearer took the cow right away to ship her on the afternoon train."
""redheaded snippet," quoted ginger in a tone of profound contempt.
at this point mr. harrison arose and, with an expression that would have struck terror into any bird but a parrot, carried ginger's cage into an adjoining room and shut the door.
ginger shrieked, swore, and otherwise conducted himself in keeping with his reputation, but finding himself left alone, relapsed into sulky silence.
""excuse me and go on," said mr. harrison, sitting down again.
""my brother the sailor never taught that bird any manners."
""i went home and after tea i went out to the milking pen.
mr. harrison,"... anne leaned forward, clasping her hands with her old childish gesture, while her big gray eyes gazed imploringly into mr. harrison's embarrassed face... "i found my cow still shut up in the pen.
it was your cow i had sold to mr. shearer."
""bless my soul," exclaimed mr. harrison, in blank amazement at this unlooked-for conclusion.
""what a very extraordinary thing!"
""oh, it is n't in the least extraordinary that i should be getting myself and other people into scrapes," said anne mournfully.
""i'm noted for that.
you might suppose i'd have grown out of it by this time... i'll be seventeen next march... but it seems that i have n't.
mr. harrison, is it too much to hope that you'll forgive me?
i'm afraid it's too late to get your cow back, but here is the money for her... or you can have mine in exchange if you'd rather.
she's a very good cow.
and i ca n't express how sorry i am for it all."
""tut, tut," said mr. harrison briskly, "do n't say another word about it, miss.
it's of no consequence... no consequence whatever.
accidents will happen.
i'm too hasty myself sometimes, miss... far too hasty.
but i ca n't help speaking out just what i think and folks must take me as they find me.
if that cow had been in my cabbages now... but never mind, she was n't, so it's all right.
i think i'd rather have your cow in exchange, since you want to be rid of her."
""oh, thank you, mr. harrison.
i'm so glad you are not vexed.
i was afraid you would be."
""and i suppose you were scared to death to come here and tell me, after the fuss i made yesterday, hey?
but you must n't mind me, i'm a terrible outspoken old fellow, that's all... awful apt to tell the truth, no matter if it is a bit plain."
""so is mrs. lynde," said anne, before she could prevent herself.
""who?
mrs. lynde?
do n't you tell me i'm like that old gossip," said mr. harrison irritably.
""i'm not... not a bit.
what have you got in that box?"
""a cake," said anne archly.
in her relief at mr. harrison's unexpected amiability her spirits soared upward feather-light.
""i brought it over for you... i thought perhaps you did n't have cake very often."
""i do n't, that's a fact, and i'm mighty fond of it, too.
i'm much obliged to you.
it looks good on top.
i hope it's good all the way through."
""it is," said anne, gaily confident.
""i have made cakes in my time that were not, as mrs. allan could tell you, but this one is all right.
i made it for the improvement society, but i can make another for them."
""well, i'll tell you what, miss, you must help me eat it.
i'll put the kettle on and we'll have a cup of tea.
how will that do?"
""will you let me make the tea?"
said anne dubiously.
mr. harrison chuckled.
""i see you have n't much confidence in my ability to make tea.
you're wrong... i can brew up as good a jorum of tea as you ever drank.
but go ahead yourself.
fortunately it rained last sunday, so there's plenty of clean dishes."
anne hopped briskly up and went to work.
she washed the teapot in several waters before she put the tea to steep.
then she swept the stove and set the table, bringing the dishes out of the pantry.
the state of that pantry horrified anne, but she wisely said nothing.
mr. harrison told her where to find the bread and butter and a can of peaches.
anne adorned the table with a bouquet from the garden and shut her eyes to the stains on the tablecloth.
soon the tea was ready and anne found herself sitting opposite mr. harrison at his own table, pouring his tea for him, and chatting freely to him about her school and friends and plans.
she could hardly believe the evidence of her senses.
mr. harrison had brought ginger back, averring that the poor bird would be lonesome; and anne, feeling that she could forgive everybody and everything, offered him a walnut.
but ginger's feelings had been grievously hurt and he rejected all overtures of friendship.
he sat moodily on his perch and ruffled his feathers up until he looked like a mere ball of green and gold.
""why do you call him ginger?"
asked anne, who liked appropriate names and thought ginger accorded not at all with such gorgeous plumage.
""my brother the sailor named him.
maybe it had some reference to his temper.
i think a lot of that bird though... you'd be surprised if you knew how much.
he has his faults of course.
that bird has cost me a good deal one way and another.
some people object to his swearing habits but he ca n't be broken of them.
i've tried... other people have tried.
some folks have prejudices against parrots.
silly, ai n't it?
i like them myself.
ginger's a lot of company to me.
nothing would induce me to give that bird up... nothing in the world, miss."
mr. harrison flung the last sentence at anne as explosively as if he suspected her of some latent design of persuading him to give ginger up.
anne, however, was beginning to like the queer, fussy, fidgety little man, and before the meal was over they were quite good friends.
mr. harrison found out about the improvement society and was disposed to approve of it.
""that's right.
go ahead.
there's lots of room for improvement in this settlement... and in the people too."
""oh, i do n't know," flashed anne.
to herself, or to her particular cronies, she might admit that there were some small imperfections, easily removable, in avonlea and its inhabitants.
but to hear a practical outsider like mr. harrison saying it was an entirely different thing.
""i think avonlea is a lovely place; and the people in it are very nice, too."
""i guess you've got a spice of temper," commented mr. harrison, surveying the flushed cheeks and indignant eyes opposite him.
""it goes with hair like yours, i reckon.
avonlea is a pretty decent place or i would n't have located here; but i suppose even you will admit that it has some faults?"
""i like it all the better for them," said loyal anne.
""i do n't like places or people either that have n't any faults.
i think a truly perfect person would be very uninteresting.
mrs. milton white says she never met a perfect person, but she's heard enough about one... her husband's first wife.
do n't you think it must be very uncomfortable to be married to a man whose first wife was perfect?"
""it would be more uncomfortable to be married to the perfect wife," declared mr. harrison, with a sudden and inexplicable warmth.
when tea was over anne insisted on washing the dishes, although mr. harrison assured her that there were enough in the house to do for weeks yet.
she would dearly have loved to sweep the floor also, but no broom was visible and she did not like to ask where it was for fear there was n't one at all.
""you might run across and talk to me once in a while," suggested mr. harrison when she was leaving."
't is n't far and folks ought to be neighborly.
i'm kind of interested in that society of yours.
seems to me there'll be some fun in it.
who are you going to tackle first?"
""we are not going to meddle with people... it is only places we mean to improve," said anne, in a dignified tone.
she rather suspected that mr. harrison was making fun of the project.
when she had gone mr. harrison watched her from the window... a lithe, girlish shape, tripping lightheartedly across the fields in the sunset afterglow.
""i'm a crusty, lonesome, crabbed old chap," he said aloud, "but there's something about that little girl makes me feel young again... and it's such a pleasant sensation i'd like to have it repeated once in a while."
""redheaded snippet," croaked ginger mockingly.
mr. harrison shook his fist at the parrot.
""you ornery bird," he muttered, "i almost wish i'd wrung your neck when my brother the sailor brought you home.
will you never be done getting me into trouble?"
anne ran home blithely and recounted her adventures to marilla, who had been not a little alarmed by her long absence and was on the point of starting out to look for her.
""it's a pretty good world, after all, is n't it, marilla?"
concluded anne happily.
""mrs. lynde was complaining the other day that it was n't much of a world.
she said whenever you looked forward to anything pleasant you were sure to be more or less disappointed... perhaps that is true.
but there is a good side to it too.
the bad things do n't always come up to your expectations either... they nearly always turn out ever so much better than you think.
i looked forward to a dreadfully unpleasant experience when i went over to mr. harrison's tonight; and instead he was quite kind and i had almost a nice time.
i think we're going to be real good friends if we make plenty of allowances for each other, and everything has turned out for the best.
but all the same, marilla, i shall certainly never again sell a cow before making sure to whom she belongs.
and i do not like parrots!"
iv different opinions one evening at sunset, jane andrews, gilbert blythe, and anne shirley were lingering by a fence in the shadow of gently swaying spruce boughs, where a wood cut known as the birch path joined the main road.
jane had been up to spend the afternoon with anne, who walked part of the way home with her; at the fence they met gilbert, and all three were now talking about the fateful morrow; for that morrow was the first of september and the schools would open.
jane would go to newbridge and gilbert to white sands.
""you both have the advantage of me," sighed anne.
""you're going to teach children who do n't know you, but i have to teach my own old schoolmates, and mrs. lynde says she's afraid they wo n't respect me as they would a stranger unless i'm very cross from the first.
but i do n't believe a teacher should be cross.
oh, it seems to me such a responsibility!"
""i guess we'll get on all right," said jane comfortably.
jane was not troubled by any aspirations to be an influence for good.
she meant to earn her salary fairly, please the trustees, and get her name on the school inspector's roll of honor.
further ambitions jane had none.
""the main thing will be to keep order and a teacher has to be a little cross to do that.
if my pupils wo n't do as i tell them i shall punish them."
""how?"
""give them a good whipping, of course."
""oh, jane, you would n't," cried anne, shocked.
""jane, you could n't!"
""indeed, i could and would, if they deserved it," said jane decidedly.
""i could never whip a child," said anne with equal decision.
""i do n't believe in it at all.
miss stacy never whipped any of us and she had perfect order; and mr. phillips was always whipping and he had no order at all.
no, if i ca n't get along without whipping i shall not try to teach school.
there are better ways of managing.
i shall try to win my pupils" affections and then they will want to do what i tell them."
""but suppose they do n't?"
said practical jane.
""i would n't whip them anyhow.
i'm sure it would n't do any good.
oh, do n't whip your pupils, jane dear, no matter what they do."
""what do you think about it, gilbert?"
demanded jane.
""do n't you think there are some children who really need a whipping now and then?"
""do n't you think it's a cruel, barbarous thing to whip a child... any child?"
exclaimed anne, her face flushing with earnestness.
""well," said gilbert slowly, torn between his real convictions and his wish to measure up to anne's ideal, "there's something to be said on both sides.
i do n't believe in whipping children much.
i think, as you say, anne, that there are better ways of managing as a rule, and that corporal punishment should be a last resort.
but on the other hand, as jane says, i believe there is an occasional child who ca n't be influenced in any other way and who, in short, needs a whipping and would be improved by it.
corporal punishment as a last resort is to be my rule."
gilbert, having tried to please both sides, succeeded, as is usual and eminently right, in pleasing neither.
jane tossed her head.
""i'll whip my pupils when they're naughty.
it's the shortest and easiest way of convincing them."
anne gave gilbert a disappointed glance.
""i shall never whip a child," she repeated firmly.
""i feel sure it is n't either right or necessary."
""suppose a boy sauced you back when you told him to do something?"
said jane.
""i'd keep him in after school and talk kindly and firmly to him," said anne.
""there is some good in every person if you can find it.
it is a teacher's duty to find and develop it.
that is what our school management professor at queen's told us, you know.
do you suppose you could find any good in a child by whipping him?
it's far more important to influence the children aright than it is even to teach them the three r's, professor rennie says."
""but the inspector examines them in the three r's, mind you, and he wo n't give you a good report if they do n't come up to his standard," protested jane.
""i'd rather have my pupils love me and look back to me in after years as a real helper than be on the roll of honor," asserted anne decidedly.
""would n't you punish children at all, when they misbehaved?"
asked gilbert.
""oh, yes, i suppose i shall have to, although i know i'll hate to do it.
but you can keep them in at recess or stand them on the floor or give them lines to write."
""i suppose you wo n't punish the girls by making them sit with the boys?"
said jane slyly.
gilbert and anne looked at each other and smiled rather foolishly.
once upon a time, anne had been made to sit with gilbert for punishment and sad and bitter had been the consequences thereof.
""well, time will tell which is the best way," said jane philosophically as they parted.
anne went back to green gables by way of birch path, shadowy, rustling, fern-scented, through violet vale and past willowmere, where dark and light kissed each other under the firs, and down through lover's lane... spots she and diana had so named long ago.
she walked slowly, enjoying the sweetness of wood and field and the starry summer twilight, and thinking soberly about the new duties she was to take up on the morrow.
when she reached the yard at green gables mrs. lynde's loud, decided tones floated out through the open kitchen window.
""mrs. lynde has come up to give me good advice about tomorrow," thought anne with a grimace, "but i do n't believe i'll go in.
her advice is much like pepper, i think... excellent in small quantities but rather scorching in her doses.
i'll run over and have a chat with mr. harrison instead."
this was not the first time anne had run over and chatted with mr. harrison since the notable affair of the jersey cow.
she had been there several evenings and mr. harrison and she were very good friends, although there were times and seasons when anne found the outspokenness on which he prided himself rather trying.
ginger still continued to regard her with suspicion, and never failed to greet her sarcastically as "redheaded snippet."
mr. harrison had tried vainly to break him of the habit by jumping excitedly up whenever he saw anne coming and exclaiming, "bless my soul, here's that pretty little girl again," or something equally flattering.
but ginger saw through the scheme and scorned it.
anne was never to know how many compliments mr. harrison paid her behind her back.
he certainly never paid her any to her face.
""well, i suppose you've been back in the woods laying in a supply of switches for tomorrow?"
was his greeting as anne came up the veranda steps.
""no, indeed," said anne indignantly.
she was an excellent target for teasing because she always took things so seriously.
""i shall never have a switch in my school, mr. harrison.
of course, i shall have to have a pointer, but i shall use it for pointing only."
""so you mean to strap them instead?
well, i do n't know but you're right.
a switch stings more at the time but the strap smarts longer, that's a fact."
""i shall not use anything of the sort.
i'm not going to whip my pupils."
""bless my soul," exclaimed mr. harrison in genuine astonishment, "how do you lay out to keep order then?"
""i shall govern by affection, mr. harrison."
""it wo n't do," said mr. harrison, "wo n't do at all, anne.
"spare the rod and spoil the child."
when i went to school the master whipped me regular every day because he said if i was n't in mischief just then i was plotting it."
""methods have changed since your schooldays, mr. harrison."
""but human nature has n't.
mark my words, you'll never manage the young fry unless you keep a rod in pickle for them.
the thing is impossible."
""well, i'm going to try my way first," said anne, who had a fairly strong will of her own and was apt to cling very tenaciously to her theories.
""you're pretty stubborn, i reckon," was mr. harrison's way of putting it.
""well, well, we'll see.
someday when you get riled up... and people with hair like yours are desperate apt to get riled... you'll forget all your pretty little notions and give some of them a whaling.
you're too young to be teaching anyhow... far too young and childish."
altogether, anne went to bed that night in a rather pessimistic mood.
she slept poorly and was so pale and tragic at breakfast next morning that marilla was alarmed and insisted on making her take a cup of scorching ginger tea.
anne sipped it patiently, although she could not imagine what good ginger tea would do.
had it been some magic brew, potent to confer age and experience, anne would have swallowed a quart of it without flinching.
""marilla, what if i fail!"
""you'll hardly fail completely in one day and there's plenty more days coming," said marilla.
""the trouble with you, anne, is that you'll expect to teach those children everything and reform all their faults right off, and if you ca n't you'll think you've failed."
v a full-fledged schoolma'am when anne reached the school that morning... for the first time in her life she had traversed the birch path deaf and blind to its beauties... all was quiet and still.
the preceding teacher had trained the children to be in their places at her arrival, and when anne entered the schoolroom she was confronted by prim rows of "shining morning faces" and bright, inquisitive eyes.
she hung up her hat and faced her pupils, hoping that she did not look as frightened and foolish as she felt and that they would not perceive how she was trembling.
she had sat up until nearly twelve the preceding night composing a speech she meant to make to her pupils upon opening the school.
she had revised and improved it painstakingly, and then she had learned it off by heart.
it was a very good speech and had some very fine ideas in it, especially about mutual help and earnest striving after knowledge.
the only trouble was that she could not now remember a word of it.
after what seemed to her a year... about ten seconds in reality... she said faintly, "take your testaments, please," and sank breathlessly into her chair under cover of the rustle and clatter of desk lids that followed.
while the children read their verses anne marshalled her shaky wits into order and looked over the array of little pilgrims to the grownup land.
most of them were, of course, quite well known to her.
her own classmates had passed out in the preceding year but the rest had all gone to school with her, excepting the primer class and ten newcomers to avonlea.
anne secretly felt more interest in these ten than in those whose possibilities were already fairly well mapped out to her.
to be sure, they might be just as commonplace as the rest; but on the other hand there might be a genius among them.
it was a thrilling idea.
sitting by himself at a corner desk was anthony pye.
he had a dark, sullen little face, and was staring at anne with a hostile expression in his black eyes.
anne instantly made up her mind that she would win that boy's affection and discomfit the pyes utterly.
in the other corner another strange boy was sitting with arty sloane... a jolly looking little chap, with a snub nose, freckled face, and big, light blue eyes, fringed with whitish lashes... probably the donnell boy; and if resemblance went for anything, his sister was sitting across the aisle with mary bell.
anne wondered what sort of mother the child had, to send her to school dressed as she was.
she wore a faded pink silk dress, trimmed with a great deal of cotton lace, soiled white kid slippers, and silk stockings.
her sandy hair was tortured into innumerable kinky and unnatural curls, surmounted by a flamboyant bow of pink ribbon bigger than her head.
judging from her expression she was very well satisfied with herself.
a pale little thing, with smooth ripples of fine, silky, fawn-colored hair flowing over her shoulders, must, anne thought, be annetta bell, whose parents had formerly lived in the newbridge school district, but, by reason of hauling their house fifty yards north of its old site were now in avonlea.
three pallid little girls crowded into one seat were certainly cottons; and there was no doubt that the small beauty with the long brown curls and hazel eyes, who was casting coquettish looks at jack gills over the edge of her testament, was prillie rogerson, whose father had recently married a second wife and brought prillie home from her grandmother's in grafton.
a tall, awkward girl in a back seat, who seemed to have too many feet and hands, anne could not place at all, but later on discovered that her name was barbara shaw and that she had come to live with an avonlea aunt.
she was also to find that if barbara ever managed to walk down the aisle without falling over her own or somebody else's feet the avonlea scholars wrote the unusual fact up on the porch wall to commemorate it.
but when anne's eyes met those of the boy at the front desk facing her own, a queer little thrill went over her, as if she had found her genius.
she knew this must be paul irving and that mrs. rachel lynde had been right for once when she prophesied that he would be unlike the avonlea children.
more than that, anne realized that he was unlike other children anywhere, and that there was a soul subtly akin to her own gazing at her out of the very dark blue eyes that were watching her so intently.
she knew paul was ten but he looked no more than eight.
he had the most beautiful little face she had ever seen in a child... features of exquisite delicacy and refinement, framed in a halo of chestnut curls.
his mouth was delicious, being full without pouting, the crimson lips just softly touching and curving into finely finished little corners that narrowly escaped being dimpled.
he had a sober, grave, meditative expression, as if his spirit was much older than his body; but when anne smiled softly at him it vanished in a sudden answering smile, which seemed an illumination of his whole being, as if some lamp had suddenly kindled into flame inside of him, irradiating him from top to toe.
best of all, it was involuntary, born of no external effort or motive, but simply the outflashing of a hidden personality, rare and fine and sweet.
with a quick interchange of smiles anne and paul were fast friends forever before a word had passed between them.
the day went by like a dream.
anne could never clearly recall it afterwards.
it almost seemed as if it were not she who was teaching but somebody else.
she heard classes and worked sums and set copies mechanically.
the children behaved quite well; only two cases of discipline occurred.
morley andrews was caught driving a pair of trained crickets in the aisle.
anne stood morley on the platform for an hour and... which morley felt much more keenly... confiscated his crickets.
she put them in a box and on the way from school set them free in violet vale; but morley believed, then and ever afterwards, that she took them home and kept them for her own amusement.
the other culprit was anthony pye, who poured the last drops of water from his slate bottle down the back of aurelia clay's neck.
anne kept anthony in at recess and talked to him about what was expected of gentlemen, admonishing him that they never poured water down ladies" necks.
she wanted all her boys to be gentlemen, she said.
her little lecture was quite kind and touching; but unfortunately anthony remained absolutely untouched.
he listened to her in silence, with the same sullen expression, and whistled scornfully as he went out.
anne sighed; and then cheered herself up by remembering that winning a pye's affections, like the building of rome, was n't the work of a day.
in fact, it was doubtful whether some of the pyes had any affections to win; but anne hoped better things of anthony, who looked as if he might be a rather nice boy if one ever got behind his sullenness.
when school was dismissed and the children had gone anne dropped wearily into her chair.
her head ached and she felt woefully discouraged.
there was no real reason for discouragement, since nothing very dreadful had occurred; but anne was very tired and inclined to believe that she would never learn to like teaching.
and how terrible it would be to be doing something you did n't like every day for... well, say forty years.
anne was of two minds whether to have her cry out then and there, or wait till she was safely in her own white room at home.
before she could decide there was a click of heels and a silken swish on the porch floor, and anne found herself confronted by a lady whose appearance made her recall a recent criticism of mr. harrison's on an overdressed female he had seen in a charlottetown store.
""she looked like a head-on collision between a fashion plate and a nightmare."
the newcomer was gorgeously arrayed in a pale blue summer silk, puffed, frilled, and shirred wherever puff, frill, or shirring could possibly be placed.
her head was surmounted by a huge white chiffon hat, bedecked with three long but rather stringy ostrich feathers.
a veil of pink chiffon, lavishly sprinkled with huge black dots, hung like a flounce from the hat brim to her shoulders and floated off in two airy streamers behind her.
she wore all the jewelry that could be crowded on one small woman, and a very strong odor of perfume attended her.
""i am mrs. donnell... mrs. h. b. donnell," announced this vision, "and i have come in to see you about something clarice almira told me when she came home to dinner today.
it annoyed me excessively."
""i'm sorry," faltered anne, vainly trying to recollect any incident of the morning connected with the donnell children.
""clarice almira told me that you pronounced our name donnell.
now, miss shirley, the correct pronunciation of our name is donnell... accent on the last syllable.
i hope you'll remember this in future."
""i'll try to," gasped anne, choking back a wild desire to laugh.
""i know by experience that it's very unpleasant to have one's name spelled wrong and i suppose it must be even worse to have it pronounced wrong."
""certainly it is.
and clarice almira also informed me that you call my son jacob."
""he told me his name was jacob," protested anne.
""i might well have expected that," said mrs. h. b. donnell, in a tone which implied that gratitude in children was not to be looked for in this degenerate age.
""that boy has such plebeian tastes, miss shirley.
when he was born i wanted to call him st. clair... it sounds so aristocratic, does n't it?
but his father insisted he should be called jacob after his uncle.
i yielded, because uncle jacob was a rich old bachelor.
and what do you think, miss shirley?
when our innocent boy was five years old uncle jacob actually went and got married and now he has three boys of his own.
did you ever hear of such ingratitude?
the moment the invitation to the wedding... for he had the impertinence to send us an invitation, miss shirley... came to the house i said, "no more jacobs for me, thank you."
from that day i called my son st. clair and st. clair i am determined he shall be called.
his father obstinately continues to call him jacob, and the boy himself has a perfectly unaccountable preference for the vulgar name.
but st. clair he is and st. clair he shall remain.
you will kindly remember this, miss shirley, will you not?
thank you.
i told clarice almira that i was sure it was only a misunderstanding and that a word would set it right.
donnell... accent on the last syllable... and st. clair... on no account jacob.
you'll remember?
thank you."
when mrs. h. b. donnell had skimmed away anne locked the school door and went home.
at the foot of the hill she found paul irving by the birch path.
he held out to her a cluster of the dainty little wild orchids which avonlea children called "rice lillies."
""please, teacher, i found these in mr. wright's field," he said shyly, "and i came back to give them to you because i thought you were the kind of lady that would like them, and because..." he lifted his big beautiful eyes... "i like you, teacher."
""you darling," said anne, taking the fragrant spikes.
as if paul's words had been a spell of magic, discouragement and weariness passed from her spirit, and hope upwelled in her heart like a dancing fountain.
she went through the birch path light-footedly, attended by the sweetness of her orchids as by a benediction.
""well, how did you get along?"
marilla wanted to know.
""ask me that a month later and i may be able to tell you.
i ca n't now... i do n't know myself... i'm too near it.
my thoughts feel as if they had been all stirred up until they were thick and muddy.
the only thing i feel really sure of having accomplished today is that i taught cliffie wright that a is a.
he never knew it before.
is n't it something to have started a soul along a path that may end in shakespeare and paradise lost?"
mrs. lynde came up later on with more encouragement.
that good lady had waylaid the schoolchildren at her gate and demanded of them how they liked their new teacher.
""and every one of them said they liked you splendid, anne, except anthony pye.
i must admit he did n't.
he said you "were n't any good, just like all girl teachers."
there's the pye leaven for you.
but never mind."
""i'm not going to mind," said anne quietly, "and i'm going to make anthony pye like me yet.
patience and kindness will surely win him."
""well, you can never tell about a pye," said mrs. rachel cautiously.
""they go by contraries, like dreams, often as not.
as for that donnell woman, she'll get no donnelling from me, i can assure you.
the name is donnell and always has been.
the woman is crazy, that's what.
she has a pug dog she calls queenie and it has its meals at the table along with the family, eating off a china plate.
i'd be afraid of a judgment if i was her.
thomas says donnell himself is a sensible, hard-working man, but he had n't much gumption when he picked out a wife, that's what."
vi all sorts and conditions of men... and women a september day on prince edward island hills; a crisp wind blowing up over the sand dunes from the sea; a long red road, winding through fields and woods, now looping itself about a corner of thick set spruces, now threading a plantation of young maples with great feathery sheets of ferns beneath them, now dipping down into a hollow where a brook flashed out of the woods and into them again, now basking in open sunshine between ribbons of golden-rod and smoke-blue asters; air athrill with the pipings of myriads of crickets, those glad little pensioners of the summer hills; a plump brown pony ambling along the road; two girls behind him, full to the lips with the simple, priceless joy of youth and life.
""oh, this is a day left over from eden, is n't it, diana?"
... and anne sighed for sheer happiness.
""the air has magic in it.
look at the purple in the cup of the harvest valley, diana.
and oh, do smell the dying fir!
it's coming up from that little sunny hollow where mr. eben wright has been cutting fence poles.
bliss is it on such a day to be alive; but to smell dying fir is very heaven.
that's two thirds wordsworth and one third anne shirley.
it does n't seem possible that there should be dying fir in heaven, does it?
and yet it does n't seem to me that heaven would be quite perfect if you could n't get a whiff of dead fir as you went through its woods.
perhaps we'll have the odor there without the death.
yes, i think that will be the way.
that delicious aroma must be the souls of the firs... and of course it will be just souls in heaven."
""trees have n't souls," said practical diana, "but the smell of dead fir is certainly lovely.
i'm going to make a cushion and fill it with fir needles.
you'd better make one too, anne."
""i think i shall... and use it for my naps.
i'd be certain to dream i was a dryad or a woodnymph then.
but just this minute i'm well content to be anne shirley, avonlea schoolma'am, driving over a road like this on such a sweet, friendly day."
""it's a lovely day but we have anything but a lovely task before us," sighed diana.
""why on earth did you offer to canvass this road, anne?
almost all the cranks in avonlea live along it, and we'll probably be treated as if we were begging for ourselves.
it's the very worst road of all."
""that is why i chose it.
of course gilbert and fred would have taken this road if we had asked them.
but you see, diana, i feel myself responsible for the a.v.i.s., since i was the first to suggest it, and it seems to me that i ought to do the most disagreeable things.
i'm sorry on your account; but you need n't say a word at the cranky places.
i'll do all the talking... mrs. lynde would say i was well able to.
mrs. lynde does n't know whether to approve of our enterprise or not.
she inclines to, when she remembers that mr. and mrs. allan are in favor of it; but the fact that village improvement societies first originated in the states is a count against it.
so she is halting between two opinions and only success will justify us in mrs. lynde's eyes.
priscilla is going to write a paper for our next improvement meeting, and i expect it will be good, for her aunt is such a clever writer and no doubt it runs in the family.
i shall never forget the thrill it gave me when i found out that mrs. charlotte e. morgan was priscilla's aunt.
it seemed so wonderful that i was a friend of the girl whose aunt wrote "edgewood days" and "the rosebud garden.""
""where does mrs. morgan live?"
""in toronto.
and priscilla says she is coming to the island for a visit next summer, and if it is possible priscilla is going to arrange to have us meet her.
that seems almost too good to be true -- but it's something pleasant to imagine after you go to bed."
the avonlea village improvement society was an organized fact.
gilbert blythe was president, fred wright vice-president, anne shirley secretary, and diana barry treasurer.
the "improvers," as they were promptly christened, were to meet once a fortnight at the homes of the members.
it was admitted that they could not expect to affect many improvements so late in the season; but they meant to plan the next summer's campaign, collect and discuss ideas, write and read papers, and, as anne said, educate the public sentiment generally.
there was some disapproval, of course, and... which the improvers felt much more keenly... a good deal of ridicule.
mr. elisha wright was reported to have said that a more appropriate name for the organization would be courting club.
mrs. hiram sloane declared she had heard the improvers meant to plough up all the roadsides and set them out with geraniums.
mr. levi boulter warned his neighbors that the improvers would insist that everybody pull down his house and rebuild it after plans approved by the society.
mr. james spencer sent them word that he wished they would kindly shovel down the church hill.
eben wright told anne that he wished the improvers could induce old josiah sloane to keep his whiskers trimmed.
mr. lawrence bell said he would whitewash his barns if nothing else would please them but he would not hang lace curtains in the cowstable windows.
mr. major spencer asked clifton sloane, an improver who drove the milk to the carmody cheese factory, if it was true that everybody would have to have his milk-stand hand-painted next summer and keep an embroidered centerpiece on it.
in spite of... or perhaps, human nature being what it is, because of... this, the society went gamely to work at the only improvement they could hope to bring about that fall.
at the second meeting, in the barry parlor, oliver sloane moved that they start a subscription to re-shingle and paint the hall; julia bell seconded it, with an uneasy feeling that she was doing something not exactly ladylike.
gilbert put the motion, it was carried unanimously, and anne gravely recorded it in her minutes.
the next thing was to appoint a committee, and gertie pye, determined not to let julia bell carry off all the laurels, boldly moved that miss jane andrews be chairman of said committee.
this motion being also duly seconded and carried, jane returned the compliment by appointing gertie on the committee, along with gilbert, anne, diana, and fred wright.
the committee chose their routes in private conclave.
anne and diana were told off for the newbridge road, gilbert and fred for the white sands road, and jane and gertie for the carmody road.
""because," explained gilbert to anne, as they walked home together through the haunted wood, "the pyes all live along that road and they wo n't give a cent unless one of themselves canvasses them."
the next saturday anne and diana started out.
they drove to the end of the road and canvassed homeward, calling first on the "andrew girls."
""if catherine is alone we may get something," said diana, "but if eliza is there we wo n't."
eliza was there... very much so... and looked even grimmer than usual.
miss eliza was one of those people who give you the impression that life is indeed a vale of tears, and that a smile, never to speak of a laugh, is a waste of nervous energy truly reprehensible.
the andrew girls had been "girls" for fifty odd years and seemed likely to remain girls to the end of their earthly pilgrimage.
catherine, it was said, had not entirely given up hope, but eliza, who was born a pessimist, had never had any.
they lived in a little brown house built in a sunny corner scooped out of mark andrew's beech woods.
eliza complained that it was terrible hot in summer, but catherine was wont to say it was lovely and warm in winter.
eliza was sewing patchwork, not because it was needed but simply as a protest against the frivolous lace catherine was crocheting.
eliza listened with a frown and catherine with a smile, as the girls explained their errand.
to be sure, whenever catherine caught eliza's eye she discarded the smile in guilty confusion; but it crept back the next moment.
""if i had money to waste," said eliza grimly, "i'd burn it up and have the fun of seeing a blaze maybe; but i would n't give it to that hall, not a cent.
it's no benefit to the settlement... just a place for young folks to meet and carry on when they's better be home in their beds."
""oh, eliza, young folks must have some amusement," protested catherine.
""i do n't see the necessity.
we did n't gad about to halls and places when we were young, catherine andrews.
this world is getting worse every day."
""i think it's getting better," said catherine firmly.
""you think!"
miss eliza's voice expressed the utmost contempt.
""it does n't signify what you think, catherine andrews.
facts is facts."
""well, i always like to look on the bright side, eliza."
""there is n't any bright side."
""oh, indeed there is," cried anne, who could n't endure such heresy in silence.
""why, there are ever so many bright sides, miss andrews.
it's really a beautiful world."
""you wo n't have such a high opinion of it when you've lived as long in it as i have," retorted miss eliza sourly, "and you wo n't be so enthusiastic about improving it either.
how is your mother, diana?
dear me, but she has failed of late.
she looks terrible run down.
and how long is it before marilla expects to be stone blind, anne?"
""the doctor thinks her eyes will not get any worse if she is very careful," faltered anne.
eliza shook her head.
""doctors always talk like that just to keep people cheered up.
i would n't have much hope if i was her.
it's best to be prepared for the worst."
""but ought n't we be prepared for the best too?"
pleaded anne.
""it's just as likely to happen as the worst."
""not in my experience, and i've fifty-seven years to set against your sixteen," retorted eliza.
""going, are you?
well, i hope this new society of yours will be able to keep avonlea from running any further down hill but i have n't much hope of it."
anne and diana got themselves thankfully out, and drove away as fast as the fat pony could go.
as they rounded the curve below the beech wood a plump figure came speeding over mr. andrews" pasture, waving to them excitedly.
it was catherine andrews and she was so out of breath that she could hardly speak, but she thrust a couple of quarters into anne's hand.
""that's my contribution to painting the hall," she gasped.
""i'd like to give you a dollar but i do n't dare take more from my egg money for eliza would find it out if i did.
i'm real interested in your society and i believe you're going to do a lot of good.
i'm an optimist.
i have to be, living with eliza.
i must hurry back before she misses me... she thinks i'm feeding the hens.
i hope you'll have good luck canvassing, and do n't be cast down over what eliza said.
the world is getting better... it certainly is."
the next house was daniel blair's.
""now, it all depends on whether his wife is home or not," said diana, as they jolted along a deep-rutted lane.
""if she is we wo n't get a cent.
everybody says dan blair does n't dare have his hair cut without asking her permission; and it's certain she's very close, to state it moderately.
she says she has to be just before she's generous.
but mrs. lynde says she's so much "before" that generosity never catches up with her at all."
anne related their experience at the blair place to marilla that evening.
""we tied the horse and then rapped at the kitchen door.
nobody came but the door was open and we could hear somebody in the pantry, going on dreadfully.
we could n't make out the words but diana says she knows they were swearing by the sound of them.
i ca n't believe that of mr. blair, for he is always so quiet and meek; but at least he had great provocation, for marilla, when that poor man came to the door, red as a beet, with perspiration streaming down his face, he had on one of his wife's big gingham aprons."
i ca n't get this durned thing off," he said, "for the strings are tied in a hard knot and i ca n't bust'em, so you'll have to excuse me, ladies."
we begged him not to mention it and went in and sat down.
mr. blair sat down too; he twisted the apron around to his back and rolled it up, but he did look so ashamed and worried that i felt sorry for him, and diana said she feared we had called at an inconvenient time.
"oh, not at all," said mr. blair, trying to smile... you know he is always very polite... "i'm a little busy... getting ready to bake a cake as it were.
my wife got a telegram today that her sister from montreal is coming tonight and she's gone to the train to meet her and left orders for me to make a cake for tea.
she writ out the recipe and told me what to do but i've clean forgot half the directions already.
and it says, "flavor according to taste."
what does that mean?
how can you tell?
and what if my taste does n't happen to be other people's taste?
would a tablespoon of vanilla be enough for a small layer cake?"
""i felt sorrier than ever for the poor man.
he did n't seem to be in his proper sphere at all.
i had heard of henpecked husbands and now i felt that i saw one.
it was on my lips to say, "mr. blair, if you'll give us a subscription for the hall i'll mix up your cake for you."
but i suddenly thought it would n't be neighborly to drive too sharp a bargain with a fellow creature in distress.
so i offered to mix the cake for him without any conditions at all.
he just jumped at my offer.
he said he'd been used to making his own bread before he was married but he feared cake was beyond him, and yet he hated to disappoint his wife.
he got me another apron, and diana beat the eggs and i mixed the cake.
mr. blair ran about and got us the materials.
he had forgotten all about his apron and when he ran it streamed out behind him and diana said she thought she would die to see it.
he said he could bake the cake all right... he was used to that... and then he asked for our list and he put down four dollars.
so you see we were rewarded.
but even if he had n't given a cent i'd always feel that we had done a truly christian act in helping him."
theodore white's was the next stopping place.
neither anne nor diana had ever been there before, and they had only a very slight acquaintance with mrs. theodore, who was not given to hospitality.
should they go to the back or front door?
while they held a whispered consultation mrs. theodore appeared at the front door with an armful of newspapers.
deliberately she laid them down one by one on the porch floor and the porch steps, and then down the path to the very feet of her mystified callers.
""will you please wipe your feet carefully on the grass and then walk on these papers?"
she said anxiously.
""i've just swept the house all over and i ca n't have any more dust tracked in.
the path's been real muddy since the rain yesterday."
""do n't you dare laugh," warned anne in a whisper, as they marched along the newspapers.
""and i implore you, diana, not to look at me, no matter what she says, or i shall not be able to keep a sober face."
the papers extended across the hall and into a prim, fleckless parlor.
anne and diana sat down gingerly on the nearest chairs and explained their errand.
mrs. white heard them politely, interrupting only twice, once to chase out an adventurous fly, and once to pick up a tiny wisp of grass that had fallen on the carpet from anne's dress.
anne felt wretchedly guilty; but mrs. white subscribed two dollars and paid the money down... "to prevent us from having to go back for it," diana said when they got away.
mrs. white had the newspapers gathered up before they had their horse untied and as they drove out of the yard they saw her busily wielding a broom in the hall.
""i've always heard that mrs. theodore white was the neatest woman alive and i'll believe it after this," said diana, giving way to her suppressed laughter as soon as it was safe.
""i am glad she has no children," said anne solemnly.
""it would be dreadful beyond words for them if she had."
at the spencers" mrs. isabella spencer made them miserable by saying something ill-natured about everyone in avonlea.
mr. thomas boulter refused to give anything because the hall, when it had been built, twenty years before, had n't been built on the site he recommended.
mrs. esther bell, who was the picture of health, took half an hour to detail all her aches and pains, and sadly put down fifty cents because she would n't be there that time next year to do it... no, she would be in her grave.
their worst reception, however, was at simon fletcher's.
when they drove into the yard they saw two faces peering at them through the porch window.
but although they rapped and waited patiently and persistently nobody came to the door.
two decidedly ruffled and indignant girls drove away from simon fletcher's.
even anne admitted that she was beginning to feel discouraged.
but the tide turned after that.
several sloane homesteads came next, where they got liberal subscriptions, and from that to the end they fared well, with only an occasional snub.
their last place of call was at robert dickson's by the pond bridge.
they stayed to tea here, although they were nearly home, rather than risk offending mrs. dickson, who had the reputation of being a very "touchy" woman.
while they were there old mrs. james white called in.
""i've just been down to lorenzo's," she announced.
""he's the proudest man in avonlea this minute.
what do you think?
there's a brand new boy there... and after seven girls that's quite an event, i can tell you."
anne pricked up her ears, and when they drove away she said.
""i'm going straight to lorenzo white's."
""but he lives on the white sands road and it's quite a distance out of our way," protested diana.
""gilbert and fred will canvass him."
""they are not going around until next saturday and it will be too late by then," said anne firmly.
""the novelty will be worn off.
lorenzo white is dreadfully mean but he will subscribe to anything just now.
we must n't let such a golden opportunity slip, diana."
the result justified anne's foresight.
mr. white met them in the yard, beaming like the sun upon an easter day.
when anne asked for a subscription he agreed enthusiastically.
""certain, certain.
just put me down for a dollar more than the highest subscription you've got."
""that will be five dollars... mr. daniel blair put down four," said anne, half afraid.
but lorenzo did not flinch.
""five it is... and here's the money on the spot.
now, i want you to come into the house.
there's something in there worth seeing... something very few people have seen as yet.
just come in and pass your opinion."
""what will we say if the baby is n't pretty?"
whispered diana in trepidation as they followed the excited lorenzo into the house.
""oh, there will certainly be something else nice to say about it," said anne easily.
""there always is about a baby."
the baby was pretty, however, and mr. white felt that he got his five dollars" worth of the girls" honest delight over the plump little newcomer.
but that was the first, last, and only time that lorenzo white ever subscribed to anything.
anne, tired as she was, made one more effort for the public weal that night, slipping over the fields to interview mr. harrison, who was as usual smoking his pipe on the veranda with ginger beside him.
strickly speaking he was on the carmody road; but jane and gertie, who were not acquainted with him save by doubtful report, had nervously begged anne to canvass him.
mr. harrison, however, flatly refused to subscribe a cent, and all anne's wiles were in vain.
""but i thought you approved of our society, mr. harrison," she mourned.
""so i do... so i do... but my approval does n't go as deep as my pocket, anne."
""a few more experiences such as i have had today would make me as much of a pessimist as miss eliza andrews," anne told her reflection in the east gable mirror at bedtime.
vii the pointing of duty anne leaned back in her chair one mild october evening and sighed.
she was sitting at a table covered with text books and exercises, but the closely written sheets of paper before her had no apparent connection with studies or school work.
""what is the matter?"
asked gilbert, who had arrived at the open kitchen door just in time to hear the sigh.
anne colored, and thrust her writing out of sight under some school compositions.
""nothing very dreadful.
i was just trying to write out some of my thoughts, as professor hamilton advised me, but i could n't get them to please me.
they seem so still and foolish directly they're written down on white paper with black ink.
fancies are like shadows... you ca n't cage them, they're such wayward, dancing things.
but perhaps i'll learn the secret some day if i keep on trying.
i have n't a great many spare moments, you know.
by the time i finish correcting school exercises and compositions, i do n't always feel like writing any of my own."
""you are getting on splendidly in school, anne.
all the children like you," said gilbert, sitting down on the stone step.
""no, not all.
anthony pye does n't and wo n't like me.
what is worse, he does n't respect me... no, he does n't.
he simply holds me in contempt and i do n't mind confessing to you that it worries me miserably.
it is n't that he is so very bad... he is only rather mischievous, but no worse than some of the others.
he seldom disobeys me; but he obeys with a scornful air of toleration as if it was n't worthwhile disputing the point or he would... and it has a bad effect on the others.
i've tried every way to win him but i'm beginning to fear i never shall.
i want to, for he's rather a cute little lad, if he is a pye, and i could like him if he'd let me."
""probably it's merely the effect of what he hears at home."
""not altogether.
anthony is an independent little chap and makes up his own mind about things.
he has always gone to men before and he says girl teachers are no good.
well, we'll see what patience and kindness will do.
i like overcoming difficulties and teaching is really very interesting work.
paul irving makes up for all that is lacking in the others.
that child is a perfect darling, gilbert, and a genius into the bargain.
i'm persuaded the world will hear of him some day," concluded anne in a tone of conviction.
""i like teaching, too," said gilbert.
""it's good training, for one thing.
why, anne, i've learned more in the weeks i've been teaching the young ideas of white sands than i learned in all the years i went to school myself.
we all seem to be getting on pretty well.
the newbridge people like jane, i hear; and i think white sands is tolerably satisfied with your humble servant... all except mr. andrew spencer.
i met mrs. peter blewett on my way home last night and she told me she thought it her duty to inform me that mr. spencer did n't approve of my methods."
""have you ever noticed," asked anne reflectively, "that when people say it is their duty to tell you a certain thing you may prepare for something disagreeable?
why is it that they never seem to think it a duty to tell you the pleasant things they hear about you?
mrs. h. b. donnell called at the school again yesterday and told me she thought it her duty to inform me that mrs. harmon andrew did n't approve of my reading fairy tales to the children, and that mr. rogerson thought prillie was n't coming on fast enough in arithmetic.
if prillie would spend less time making eyes at the boys over her slate she might do better.
i feel quite sure that jack gillis works her class sums for her, though i've never been able to catch him red-handed."
""have you succeeded in reconciling mrs. donnell's hopeful son to his saintly name?"
""yes," laughed anne, "but it was really a difficult task.
at first, when i called him "st. clair" he would not take the least notice until i'd spoken two or three times; and then, when the other boys nudged him, he would look up with such an aggrieved air, as if i'd called him john or charlie and he could n't be expected to know i meant him.
so i kept him in after school one night and talked kindly to him.
i told him his mother wished me to call him st. clair and i could n't go against her wishes.
he saw it when it was all explained out... he's really a very reasonable little fellow... and he said i could call him st. clair but that he'd "lick the stuffing" out of any of the boys that tried it.
of course, i had to rebuke him again for using such shocking language.
since then i call him st. clair and the boys call him jake and all goes smoothly.
he informs me that he means to be a carpenter, but mrs. donnell says i am to make a college professor out of him."
the mention of college gave a new direction to gilbert's thoughts, and they talked for a time of their plans and wishes... gravely, earnestly, hopefully, as youth loves to talk, while the future is yet an untrodden path full of wonderful possibilities.
gilbert had finally made up his mind that he was going to be a doctor.
""it's a splendid profession," he said enthusiastically.
""a fellow has to fight something all through life... did n't somebody once define man as a fighting animal?
... and i want to fight disease and pain and ignorance... which are all members one of another.
i want to do my share of honest, real work in the world, anne... add a little to the sum of human knowledge that all the good men have been accumulating since it began.
the folks who lived before me have done so much for me that i want to show my gratitude by doing something for the folks who will live after me.
it seems to me that is the only way a fellow can get square with his obligations to the race."
""i'd like to add some beauty to life," said anne dreamily.
""i do n't exactly want to make people know more... though i know that is the noblest ambition... but i'd love to make them have a pleasanter time because of me... to have some little joy or happy thought that would never have existed if i had n't been born."
""i think you're fulfilling that ambition every day," said gilbert admiringly.
and he was right.
anne was one of the children of light by birthright.
after she had passed through a life with a smile or a word thrown across it like a gleam of sunshine the owner of that life saw it, for the time being at least, as hopeful and lovely and of good report.
finally gilbert rose regretfully.
""well, i must run up to macphersons".
moody spurgeon came home from queen's today for sunday and he was to bring me out a book professor boyd is lending me."
""and i must get marilla's tea.
she went to see mrs. keith this evening and she will soon be back."
anne had tea ready when marilla came home; the fire was crackling cheerily, a vase of frost-bleached ferns and ruby-red maple leaves adorned the table, and delectable odors of ham and toast pervaded the air.
but marilla sank into her chair with a deep sigh.
""are your eyes troubling you?
does your head ache?"
queried anne anxiously.
""no.
i'm only tired... and worried.
it's about mary and those children... mary is worse... she ca n't last much longer.
and as for the twins, i do n't know what is to become of them."
""has n't their uncle been heard from?"
""yes, mary had a letter from him.
he's working in a lumber camp and "shacking it," whatever that means.
anyway, he says he ca n't possibly take the children till the spring.
he expects to be married then and will have a home to take them to; but he says she must get some of the neighbors to keep them for the winter.
she says she ca n't bear to ask any of them.
mary never got on any too well with the east grafton people and that's a fact.
and the long and short of it is, anne, that i'm sure mary wants me to take those children... she did n't say so but she looked it."
""oh!"
anne clasped her hands, all athrill with excitement.
""and of course you will, marilla, wo n't you?"
""i have n't made up my mind," said marilla rather tartly.
""i do n't rush into things in your headlong way, anne.
third cousinship is a pretty slim claim.
and it will be a fearful responsibility to have two children of six years to look after... twins, at that."
marilla had an idea that twins were just twice as bad as single children.
""twins are very interesting... at least one pair of them," said anne.
""it's only when there are two or three pairs that it gets monotonous.
and i think it would be real nice for you to have something to amuse you when i'm away in school."
""i do n't reckon there'd be much amusement in it... more worry and bother than anything else, i should say.
it would n't be so risky if they were even as old as you were when i took you.
i would n't mind dora so much... she seems good and quiet.
but that davy is a limb."
anne was fond of children and her heart yearned over the keith twins.
the remembrance of her own neglected childhood was very vivid with her still.
she knew that marilla's only vulnerable point was her stern devotion to what she believed to be her duty, and anne skillfully marshalled her arguments along this line.
""if davy is naughty it's all the more reason why he should have good training, is n't it, marilla?
if we do n't take them we do n't know who will, nor what kind of influences may surround them.
suppose mrs. keith's next door neighbors, the sprotts, were to take them.
mrs. lynde says henry sprott is the most profane man that ever lived and you ca n't believe a word his children say.
would n't it be dreadful to have the twins learn anything like that?
or suppose they went to the wiggins".
mrs. lynde says that mr. wiggins sells everything off the place that can be sold and brings his family up on skim milk.
you would n't like your relations to be starved, even if they were only third cousins, would you?
it seems to me, marilla, that it is our duty to take them."
""i suppose it is," assented marilla gloomily.
""i daresay i'll tell mary i'll take them.
you need n't look so delighted, anne.
it will mean a good deal of extra work for you.
i ca n't sew a stitch on account of my eyes, so you'll have to see to the making and mending of their clothes.
and you do n't like sewing."
""i hate it," said anne calmly, "but if you are willing to take those children from a sense of duty surely i can do their sewing from a sense of duty.
it does people good to have to do things they do n't like... in moderation."
viii marilla adopts twins mrs. rachel lynde was sitting at her kitchen window, knitting a quilt, just as she had been sitting one evening several years previously when matthew cuthbert had driven down over the hill with what mrs. rachel called "his imported orphan."
but that had been in springtime; and this was late autumn, and all the woods were leafless and the fields sere and brown.
the sun was just setting with a great deal of purple and golden pomp behind the dark woods west of avonlea when a buggy drawn by a comfortable brown nag came down the hill.
mrs. rachel peered at it eagerly.
""there's marilla getting home from the funeral," she said to her husband, who was lying on the kitchen lounge.
thomas lynde lay more on the lounge nowadays than he had been used to do, but mrs. rachel, who was so sharp at noticing anything beyond her own household, had not as yet noticed this.
""and she's got the twins with her,... yes, there's davy leaning over the dashboard grabbing at the pony's tail and marilla jerking him back.
dora's sitting up on the seat as prim as you please.
she always looks as if she'd just been starched and ironed.
well, poor marilla is going to have her hands full this winter and no mistake.
still, i do n't see that she could do anything less than take them, under the circumstances, and she'll have anne to help her.
anne's tickled to death over the whole business, and she has a real knacky way with children, i must say.
dear me, it does n't seem a day since poor matthew brought anne herself home and everybody laughed at the idea of marilla bringing up a child.
and now she has adopted twins.
you're never safe from being surprised till you're dead."
the fat pony jogged over the bridge in lynde's hollow and along the green gables lane.
marilla's face was rather grim.
it was ten miles from east grafton and davy keith seemed to be possessed with a passion for perpetual motion.
it was beyond marilla's power to make him sit still and she had been in an agony the whole way lest he fall over the back of the wagon and break his neck, or tumble over the dashboard under the pony's heels.
in despair she finally threatened to whip him soundly when she got him home.
whereupon davy climbed into her lap, regardless of the reins, flung his chubby arms about her neck and gave her a bear-like hug.
""i do n't believe you mean it," he said, smacking her wrinkled cheek affectionately.
""you do n't look like a lady who'd whip a little boy just'cause he could n't keep still.
did n't you find it awful hard to keep still when you was only's old as me?"
""no, i always kept still when i was told," said marilla, trying to speak sternly, albeit she felt her heart waxing soft within her under davy's impulsive caresses.
""well, i s "pose that was'cause you was a girl," said davy, squirming back to his place after another hug.
""you was a girl once, i s "pose, though it's awful funny to think of it.
dora can sit still... but there ai n't much fun in it i do n't think.
seems to me it must be slow to be a girl.
here, dora, let me liven you up a bit."
davy's method of "livening up" was to grasp dora's curls in his fingers and give them a tug.
dora shrieked and then cried.
""how can you be such a naughty boy and your poor mother just laid in her grave this very day?"
demanded marilla despairingly.
""but she was glad to die," said davy confidentially.
""i know,'cause she told me so.
she was awful tired of being sick.
we'd a long talk the night before she died.
she told me you was going to take me and dora for the winter and i was to be a good boy.
i'm going to be good, but ca n't you be good running round just as well as sitting still?
and she said i was always to be kind to dora and stand up for her, and i'm going to."
""do you call pulling her hair being kind to her?"
""well, i ai n't going to let anybody else pull it," said davy, doubling up his fists and frowning.
""they'd just better try it.
i did n't hurt her much... she just cried'cause she's a girl.
i'm glad i'm a boy but i'm sorry i'm a twin.
when jimmy sprott's sister conterdicks him he just says, "i'm oldern you, so of course i know better," and that settles her.
but i ca n't tell dora that, and she just goes on thinking diffrunt from me.
you might let me drive the gee-gee for a spell, since i'm a man."
altogether, marilla was a thankful woman when she drove into her own yard, where the wind of the autumn night was dancing with the brown leaves.
anne was at the gate to meet them and lift the twins out.
dora submitted calmly to be kissed, but davy responded to anne's welcome with one of his hearty hugs and the cheerful announcement, "i'm mr. davy keith."
at the supper table dora behaved like a little lady, but davy's manners left much to be desired.
""i'm so hungry i ai n't got time to eat p "litely," he said when marilla reproved him.
""dora ai n't half as hungry as i am.
look at all the ex "cise i took on the road here.
that cake's awful nice and plummy.
we have n't had any cake at home for ever'n ever so long,'cause mother was too sick to make it and mrs. sprott said it was as much as she could do to bake our bread for us.
and mrs. wiggins never puts any plums in her cakes.
catch her!
can i have another piece?"
marilla would have refused but anne cut a generous second slice.
however, she reminded davy that he ought to say "thank you" for it.
davy merely grinned at her and took a huge bite.
when he had finished the slice he said, "if you'll give me another piece i'll say thank you for it."
""no, you have had plenty of cake," said marilla in a tone which anne knew and davy was to learn to be final.
davy winked at anne, and then, leaning over the table, snatched dora's first piece of cake, from which she had just taken one dainty little bite, out of her very fingers and, opening his mouth to the fullest extent, crammed the whole slice in.
dora's lip trembled and marilla was speechless with horror.
anne promptly exclaimed, with her best "schoolma'am" air, "oh, davy, gentlemen do n't do things like that."
""i know they do n't," said davy, as soon as he could speak, "but i ai n't a gemplum."
""but do n't you want to be?"
said shocked anne.
""course i do.
but you ca n't be a gemplum till you grow up."
""oh, indeed you can," anne hastened to say, thinking she saw a chance to sow good seed betimes.
""you can begin to be a gentleman when you are a little boy.
and gentlemen never snatch things from ladies... or forget to say thank you... or pull anybody's hair."
""they do n't have much fun, that's a fact," said davy frankly.
""i guess i'll wait till i'm grown up to be one."
marilla, with a resigned air, had cut another piece of cake for dora.
she did not feel able to cope with davy just then.
it had been a hard day for her, what with the funeral and the long drive.
at that moment she looked forward to the future with a pessimism that would have done credit to eliza andrews herself.
the twins were not noticeably alike, although both were fair.
dora had long sleek curls that never got out of order.
davy had a crop of fuzzy little yellow ringlets all over his round head.
dora's hazel eyes were gentle and mild; davy's were as roguish and dancing as an elf's.
dora's nose was straight, davy's a positive snub; dora had a "prunes and prisms" mouth, davy's was all smiles; and besides, he had a dimple in one cheek and none in the other, which gave him a dear, comical, lopsided look when he laughed.
mirth and mischief lurked in every corner of his little face.
""they'd better go to bed," said marilla, who thought it was the easiest way to dispose of them.
""dora will sleep with me and you can put davy in the west gable.
you're not afraid to sleep alone, are you, davy?"
""no; but i ai n't going to bed for ever so long yet," said davy comfortably.
""oh, yes, you are."
that was all the much-tried marilla said, but something in her tone squelched even davy.
he trotted obediently upstairs with anne.
""when i'm grown up the very first thing i'm going to do is stay up all night just to see what it would be like," he told her confidentially.
in after years marilla never thought of that first week of the twins" sojourn at green gables without a shiver.
not that it really was so much worse than the weeks that followed it; but it seemed so by reason of its novelty.
there was seldom a waking minute of any day when davy was not in mischief or devising it; but his first notable exploit occurred two days after his arrival, on sunday morning... a fine, warm day, as hazy and mild as september.
anne dressed him for church while marilla attended to dora.
davy at first objected strongly to having his face washed.
""marilla washed it yesterday... and mrs. wiggins scoured me with hard soap the day of the funeral.
that's enough for one week.
i do n't see the good of being so awful clean.
it's lots more comfable being dirty."
""paul irving washes his face every day of his own accord," said anne astutely.
davy had been an inmate of green gables for little over forty-eight hours; but he already worshipped anne and hated paul irving, whom he had heard anne praising enthusiastically the day after his arrival.
if paul irving washed his face every day, that settled it.
he, davy keith, would do it too, if it killed him.
the same consideration induced him to submit meekly to the other details of his toilet, and he was really a handsome little lad when all was done.
anne felt an almost maternal pride in him as she led him into the old cuthbert pew.
davy behaved quite well at first, being occupied in casting covert glances at all the small boys within view and wondering which was paul irving.
the first two hymns and the scripture reading passed off uneventfully.
mr. allan was praying when the sensation came.
lauretta white was sitting in front of davy, her head slightly bent and her fair hair hanging in two long braids, between which a tempting expanse of white neck showed, encased in a loose lace frill.
lauretta was a fat, placid-looking child of eight, who had conducted herself irreproachably in church from the very first day her mother carried her there, an infant of six months.
davy thrust his hand into his pocket and produced... a caterpillar, a furry, squirming caterpillar.
marilla saw and clutched at him but she was too late.
davy dropped the caterpillar down lauretta's neck.
right into the middle of mr. allan's prayer burst a series of piercing shrieks.
the minister stopped appalled and opened his eyes.
every head in the congregation flew up.
lauretta white was dancing up and down in her pew, clutching frantically at the back of her dress.
""ow... mommer... mommer... ow... take it off... ow... get it out... ow... that bad boy put it down my neck... ow... mommer... it's going further down... ow... ow... ow..." mrs. white rose and with a set face carried the hysterical, writhing lauretta out of church.
her shrieks died away in the distance and mr. allan proceeded with the service.
but everybody felt that it was a failure that day.
for the first time in her life marilla took no notice of the text and anne sat with scarlet cheeks of mortification.
when they got home marilla put davy to bed and made him stay there for the rest of the day.
she would not give him any dinner but allowed him a plain tea of bread and milk.
anne carried it to him and sat sorrowfully by him while he ate it with an unrepentant relish.
but anne's mournful eyes troubled him.
""i s "pose," he said reflectively, "that paul irving would n't have dropped a caterpillar down a girl's neck in church, would he?"
""indeed he would n't," said anne sadly.
""well, i'm kind of sorry i did it, then," conceded davy.
""but it was such a jolly big caterpillar... i picked him up on the church steps just as we went in.
it seemed a pity to waste him.
and say, was n't it fun to hear that girl yell?"
tuesday afternoon the aid society met at green gables.
anne hurried home from school, for she knew that marilla would need all the assistance she could give.
dora, neat and proper, in her nicely starched white dress and black sash, was sitting with the members of the aid in the parlor, speaking demurely when spoken to, keeping silence when not, and in every way comporting herself as a model child.
davy, blissfully dirty, was making mud pies in the barnyard.
""i told him he might," said marilla wearily.
""i thought it would keep him out of worse mischief.
he can only get dirty at that.
we'll have our teas over before we call him to his.
dora can have hers with us, but i would never dare to let davy sit down at the table with all the aids here."
when anne went to call the aids to tea she found that dora was not in the parlor.
mrs. jasper bell said davy had come to the front door and called her out.
a hasty consultation with marilla in the pantry resulted in a decision to let both children have their teas together later on.
tea was half over when the dining room was invaded by a forlorn figure.
marilla and anne stared in dismay, the aids in amazement.
could that be dora... that sobbing nondescript in a drenched, dripping dress and hair from which the water was streaming on marilla's new coin-spot rug?
""dora, what has happened to you?"
cried anne, with a guilty glance at mrs. jasper bell, whose family was said to be the only one in the world in which accidents never occurred.
""davy made me walk the pigpen fence," wailed dora.
""i did n't want to but he called me a fraid-cat.
and i fell off into the pigpen and my dress got all dirty and the pig runned right over me.
my dress was just awful but davy said if i'd stand under the pump he'd wash it clean, and i did and he pumped water all over me but my dress ai n't a bit cleaner and my pretty sash and shoes is all spoiled."
anne did the honors of the table alone for the rest of the meal while marilla went upstairs and redressed dora in her old clothes.
davy was caught and sent to bed without any supper.
anne went to his room at twilight and talked to him seriously... a method in which she had great faith, not altogether unjustified by results.
she told him she felt very badly over his conduct.
""i feel sorry now myself," admitted davy, "but the trouble is i never feel sorry for doing things till after i've did them.
dora would n't help me make pies, cause she was afraid of messing her clo'es and that made me hopping mad.
i s "pose paul irving would n't have made his sister walk a pigpen fence if he knew she'd fall in?"
""no, he would never dream of such a thing.
paul is a perfect little gentleman."
davy screwed his eyes tight shut and seemed to meditate on this for a time.
then he crawled up and put his arms about anne's neck, snuggling his flushed little face down on her shoulder.
""anne, do n't you like me a little bit, even if i ai n't a good boy like paul?"
""indeed i do," said anne sincerely.
somehow, it was impossible to help liking davy.
""but i'd like you better still if you were n't so naughty."
""i... did something else today," went on davy in a muffled voice.
""i'm sorry now but i'm awful scared to tell you.
you wo n't be very cross, will you?
and you wo n't tell marilla, will you?"
""i do n't know, davy.
perhaps i ought to tell her.
but i think i can promise you i wo n't if you promise me that you will never do it again, whatever it is."
""no, i never will.
anyhow, it's not likely i'd find any more of them this year.
i found this one on the cellar steps."
""davy, what is it you've done?"
""i put a toad in marilla's bed.
you can go and take it out if you like.
but say, anne, would n't it be fun to leave it there?"
""davy keith!"
anne sprang from davy's clinging arms and flew across the hall to marilla's room.
the bed was slightly rumpled.
she threw back the blankets in nervous haste and there in very truth was the toad, blinking at her from under a pillow.
""how can i carry that awful thing out?"
moaned anne with a shudder.
the fire shovel suggested itself to her and she crept down to get it while marilla was busy in the pantry.
anne had her own troubles carrying that toad downstairs, for it hopped off the shovel three times and once she thought she had lost it in the hall.
when she finally deposited it in the cherry orchard she drew a long breath of relief.
""if marilla knew she'd never feel safe getting into bed again in her life.
i'm so glad that little sinner repented in time.
there's diana signaling to me from her window.
i'm glad... i really feel the need of some diversion, for what with anthony pye in school and davy keith at home my nerves have had about all they can endure for one day."
ix a question of color "that old nuisance of a rachel lynde was here again today, pestering me for a subscription towards buying a carpet for the vestry room," said mr. harrison wrathfully.
""i detest that woman more than anybody i know.
she can put a whole sermon, text, comment, and application, into six words, and throw it at you like a brick."
anne, who was perched on the edge of the veranda, enjoying the charm of a mild west wind blowing across a newly ploughed field on a gray november twilight and piping a quaint little melody among the twisted firs below the garden, turned her dreamy face over her shoulder.
""the trouble is, you and mrs. lynde do n't understand one another," she explained.
""that is always what is wrong when people do n't like each other.
i did n't like mrs. lynde at first either; but as soon as i came to understand her i learned to."
""mrs. lynde may be an acquired taste with some folks; but i did n't keep on eating bananas because i was told i'd learn to like them if i did," growled mr. harrison.
""and as for understanding her, i understand that she is a confirmed busybody and i told her so."
""oh, that must have hurt her feelings very much," said anne reproachfully.
""how could you say such a thing?
i said some dreadful things to mrs. lynde long ago but it was when i had lost my temper.
i could n't say them deliberately."
""it was the truth and i believe in telling the truth to everybody."
""but you do n't tell the whole truth," objected anne.
""you only tell the disagreeable part of the truth.
now, you've told me a dozen times that my hair was red, but you've never once told me that i had a nice nose."
""i daresay you know it without any telling," chuckled mr. harrison.
""i know i have red hair too... although it's much darker than it used to be... so there's no need of telling me that either."
""well, well, i'll try and not mention it again since you're so sensitive.
you must excuse me, anne.
i've got a habit of being outspoken and folks must n't mind it."
""but they ca n't help minding it.
and i do n't think it's any help that it's your habit.
what would you think of a person who went about sticking pins and needles into people and saying, "excuse me, you must n't mind it... it's just a habit i've got."
you'd think he was crazy, would n't you?
and as for mrs. lynde being a busybody, perhaps she is.
but did you tell her she had a very kind heart and always helped the poor, and never said a word when timothy cotton stole a crock of butter out of her dairy and told his wife he'd bought it from her?
mrs. cotton cast it up to her the next time they met that it tasted of turnips and mrs. lynde just said she was sorry it had turned out so poorly."
""i suppose she has some good qualities," conceded mr. harrison grudgingly.
""most folks have.
i have some myself, though you might never suspect it.
but anyhow i ai n't going to give anything to that carpet.
folks are everlasting begging for money here, it seems to me.
how's your project of painting the hall coming on?"
""splendidly.
we had a meeting of the a.v.i.s. last friday night and found that we had plenty of money subscribed to paint the hall and shingle the roof too.
most people gave very liberally, mr. harrison."
anne was a sweet-souled lass, but she could instill some venom into innocent italics when occasion required.
""what color are you going to have it?"
""we have decided on a very pretty green.
the roof will be dark red, of course.
mr. roger pye is going to get the paint in town today."
""who's got the job?"
""mr. joshua pye of carmody.
he has nearly finished the shingling.
we had to give him the contract, for every one of the pyes... and there are four families, you know... said they would n't give a cent unless joshua got it.
they had subscribed twelve dollars between them and we thought that was too much to lose, although some people think we should n't have given in to the pyes.
mrs. lynde says they try to run everything."
""the main question is will this joshua do his work well.
if he does i do n't see that it matters whether his name is pye or pudding."
""he has the reputation of being a good workman, though they say he's a very peculiar man.
he hardly ever talks."
""he's peculiar enough all right then," said mr. harrison drily.
""or at least, folks here will call him so.
i never was much of a talker till i came to avonlea and then i had to begin in self-defense or mrs. lynde would have said i was dumb and started a subscription to have me taught sign language.
you're not going yet, anne?"
""i must.
i have some sewing to do for dora this evening.
besides, davy is probably breaking marilla's heart with some new mischief by this time.
this morning the first thing he said was, "where does the dark go, anne?
i want to know."
i told him it went around to the other side of the world but after breakfast he declared it did n't... that it went down the well.
marilla says she caught him hanging over the well-box four times today, trying to reach down to the dark."
""he's a limb," declared mr. harrison.
""he came over here yesterday and pulled six feathers out of ginger's tail before i could get in from the barn.
the poor bird has been moping ever since.
those children must be a sight of trouble to you folks."
""everything that's worth having is some trouble," said anne, secretly resolving to forgive davy's next offence, whatever it might be, since he had avenged her on ginger.
mr. roger pye brought the hall paint home that night and mr. joshua pye, a surly, taciturn man, began painting the next day.
he was not disturbed in his task.
the hall was situated on what was called "the lower road."
in late autumn this road was always muddy and wet, and people going to carmody traveled by the longer "upper" road.
the hall was so closely surrounded by fir woods that it was invisible unless you were near it.
mr. joshua pye painted away in the solitude and independence that were so dear to his unsociable heart.
friday afternoon he finished his job and went home to carmody.
soon after his departure mrs. rachel lynde drove by, having braved the mud of the lower road out of curiosity to see what the hall looked like in its new coat of paint.
when she rounded the spruce curve she saw.
the sight affected mrs. lynde oddly.
she dropped the reins, held up her hands, and said "gracious providence!"
she stared as if she could not believe her eyes.
then she laughed almost hysterically.
""there must be some mistake... there must.
i knew those pyes would make a mess of things."
mrs. lynde drove home, meeting several people on the road and stopping to tell them about the hall.
the news flew like wildfire.
gilbert blythe, poring over a text book at home, heard it from his father's hired boy at sunset, and rushed breathlessly to green gables, joined on the way by fred wright.
they found diana barry, jane andrews, and anne shirley, despair personified, at the yard gate of green gables, under the big leafless willows.
""it is n't true surely, anne?"
exclaimed gilbert.
""it is true," answered anne, looking like the muse of tragedy.
""mrs. lynde called on her way from carmody to tell me.
oh, it is simply dreadful!
what is the use of trying to improve anything?"
""what is dreadful?"
asked oliver sloane, arriving at this moment with a bandbox he had brought from town for marilla.
""have n't you heard?"
said jane wrathfully.
""well, its simply this... joshua pye has gone and painted the hall blue instead of green... a deep, brilliant blue, the shade they use for painting carts and wheelbarrows.
and mrs. lynde says it is the most hideous color for a building, especially when combined with a red roof, that she ever saw or imagined.
you could simply have knocked me down with a feather when i heard it.
it's heartbreaking, after all the trouble we've had."
""how on earth could such a mistake have happened?"
wailed diana.
the blame of this unmerciful disaster was eventually narrowed down to the pyes.
the improvers had decided to use morton-harris paints and the morton-harris paint cans were numbered according to a color card.
a purchaser chose his shade on the card and ordered by the accompanying number.
number 147 was the shade of green desired and when mr. roger pye sent word to the improvers by his son, john andrew, that he was going to town and would get their paint for them, the improvers told john andrew to tell his father to get 147.
john andrew always averred that he did so, but mr. roger pye as stanchly declared that john andrew told him 157; and there the matter stands to this day.
that night there was blank dismay in every avonlea house where an improver lived.
the gloom at green gables was so intense that it quenched even davy.
anne wept and would not be comforted.
""i must cry, even if i am almost seventeen, marilla," she sobbed.
""it is so mortifying.
and it sounds the death knell of our society.
we'll simply be laughed out of existence."
in life, as in dreams, however, things often go by contraries.
the avonlea people did not laugh; they were too angry.
their money had gone to paint the hall and consequently they felt themselves bitterly aggrieved by the mistake.
public indignation centered on the pyes.
roger pye and john andrew had bungled the matter between them; and as for joshua pye, he must be a born fool not to suspect there was something wrong when he opened the cans and saw the color of the paint.
joshua pye, when thus animadverted upon, retorted that the avonlea taste in colors was no business of his, whatever his private opinion might be; he had been hired to paint the hall, not to talk about it; and he meant to have his money for it.
the improvers paid him his money in bitterness of spirit, after consulting mr. peter sloane, who was a magistrate.
""you'll have to pay it," peter told him.
""you ca n't hold him responsible for the mistake, since he claims he was never told what the color was supposed to be but just given the cans and told to go ahead.
but it's a burning shame and that hall certainly does look awful."
the luckless improvers expected that avonlea would be more prejudiced than ever against them; but instead, public sympathy veered around in their favor.
people thought the eager, enthusiastic little band who had worked so hard for their object had been badly used.
mrs. lynde told them to keep on and show the pyes that there really were people in the world who could do things without making a muddle of them.
mr. major spencer sent them word that he would clean out all the stumps along the road front of his farm and seed it down with grass at his own expense; and mrs. hiram sloane called at the school one day and beckoned anne mysteriously out into the porch to tell her that if the "sassiety" wanted to make a geranium bed at the crossroads in the spring they need n't be afraid of her cow, for she would see that the marauding animal was kept within safe bounds.
even mr. harrison chuckled, if he chuckled at all, in private, and was all sympathy outwardly.
""never mind, anne.
most paints fade uglier every year but that blue is as ugly as it can be to begin with, so it's bound to fade prettier.
and the roof is shingled and painted all right.
folks will be able to sit in the hall after this without being leaked on.
you've accomplished so much anyhow."
""but avonlea's blue hall will be a byword in all the neighboring settlements from this time out," said anne bitterly.
and it must be confessed that it was.
x davy in search of a sensation anne, walking home from school through the birch path one november afternoon, felt convinced afresh that life was a very wonderful thing.
the day had been a good day; all had gone well in her little kingdom.
st. clair donnell had not fought any of the other boys over the question of his name; prillie rogerson's face had been so puffed up from the effects of toothache that she did not once try to coquette with the boys in her vicinity.
barbara shaw had met with only one accident... spilling a dipper of water over the floor... and anthony pye had not been in school at all.
""what a nice month this november has been!"
said anne, who had never quite got over her childish habit of talking to herself.
""november is usually such a disagreeable month... as if the year had suddenly found out that she was growing old and could do nothing but weep and fret over it.
this year is growing old gracefully... just like a stately old lady who knows she can be charming even with gray hair and wrinkles.
we've had lovely days and delicious twilights.
this last fortnight has been so peaceful, and even davy has been almost well-behaved.
i really think he is improving a great deal.
how quiet the woods are today... not a murmur except that soft wind purring in the treetops!
it sounds like surf on a faraway shore.
how dear the woods are!
you beautiful trees!
i love every one of you as a friend."
anne paused to throw her arm about a slim young birch and kiss its cream-white trunk.
diana, rounding a curve in the path, saw her and laughed.
""anne shirley, you're only pretending to be grown up.
i believe when you're alone you're as much a little girl as you ever were."
""well, one ca n't get over the habit of being a little girl all at once," said anne gaily.
""you see, i was little for fourteen years and i've only been grown-uppish for scarcely three.
i'm sure i shall always feel like a child in the woods.
these walks home from school are almost the only time i have for dreaming... except the half-hour or so before i go to sleep.
i'm so busy with teaching and studying and helping marilla with the twins that i have n't another moment for imagining things.
you do n't know what splendid adventures i have for a little while after i go to bed in the east gable every night.
i always imagine i'm something very brilliant and triumphant and splendid... a great prima donna or a red cross nurse or a queen.
last night i was a queen.
it's really splendid to imagine you are a queen.
you have all the fun of it without any of the inconveniences and you can stop being a queen whenever you want to, which you could n't in real life.
but here in the woods i like best to imagine quite different things... i'm a dryad living in an old pine, or a little brown wood-elf hiding under a crinkled leaf.
that white birch you caught me kissing is a sister of mine.
the only difference is, she's a tree and i'm a girl, but that's no real difference.
where are you going, diana?"
""down to the dicksons.
i promised to help alberta cut out her new dress.
ca n't you walk down in the evening, anne, and come home with me?"
""i might... since fred wright is away in town," said anne with a rather too innocent face.
diana blushed, tossed her head, and walked on.
she did not look offended, however.
anne fully intended to go down to the dicksons" that evening, but she did not.
when she arrived at green gables she found a state of affairs which banished every other thought from her mind.
marilla met her in the yard... a wild-eyed marilla.
""anne, dora is lost!"
""dora!
lost!"
anne looked at davy, who was swinging on the yard gate, and detected merriment in his eyes.
""davy, do you know where she is?"
""no, i do n't," said davy stoutly.
""i have n't seen her since dinner time, cross my heart."
""i've been away ever since one o'clock," said marilla.
""thomas lynde took sick all of a sudden and rachel sent up for me to go at once.
when i left here dora was playing with her doll in the kitchen and davy was making mud pies behind the barn.
i only got home half an hour ago... and no dora to be seen.
davy declares he never saw her since i left."
""neither i did," avowed davy solemnly.
""she must be somewhere around," said anne.
""she would never wander far away alone... you know how timid she is.
perhaps she has fallen asleep in one of the rooms."
marilla shook her head.
""i've hunted the whole house through.
but she may be in some of the buildings."
a thorough search followed.
every corner of house, yard, and outbuildings was ransacked by those two distracted people.
anne roved the orchards and the haunted wood, calling dora's name.
marilla took a candle and explored the cellar.
davy accompanied each of them in turn, and was fertile in thinking of places where dora could possibly be.
finally they met again in the yard.
""it's a most mysterious thing," groaned marilla.
""where can she be?"
said anne miserably "maybe she's tumbled into the well," suggested davy cheerfully.
anne and marilla looked fearfully into each other's eyes.
the thought had been with them both through their entire search but neither had dared to put it into words.
""she... she might have," whispered marilla.
anne, feeling faint and sick, went to the wellbox and peered over.
the bucket sat on the shelf inside.
far down below was a tiny glimmer of still water.
the cuthbert well was the deepest in avonlea.
if dora... but anne could not face the idea.
she shuddered and turned away.
""run across for mr. harrison," said marilla, wringing her hands.
""mr. harrison and john henry are both away... they went to town today.
i'll go for mr. barry."
mr. barry came back with anne, carrying a coil of rope to which was attached a claw-like instrument that had been the business end of a grubbing fork.
marilla and anne stood by, cold and shaken with horror and dread, while mr. barry dragged the well, and davy, astride the gate, watched the group with a face indicative of huge enjoyment.
finally mr. barry shook his head, with a relieved air.
""she ca n't be down there.
it's a mighty curious thing where she could have got to, though.
look here, young man, are you sure you've no idea where your sister is?"
""i've told you a dozen times that i have n't," said davy, with an injured air.
""maybe a tramp come and stole her."
""nonsense," said marilla sharply, relieved from her horrible fear of the well.
""anne, do you suppose she could have strayed over to mr. harrison's?
she has always been talking about his parrot ever since that time you took her over."
""i ca n't believe dora would venture so far alone but i'll go over and see," said anne.
nobody was looking at davy just then or it would have been seen that a very decided change came over his face.
he quietly slipped off the gate and ran, as fast as his fat legs could carry him, to the barn.
anne hastened across the fields to the harrison establishment in no very hopeful frame of mind.
the house was locked, the window shades were down, and there was no sign of anything living about the place.
she stood on the veranda and called dora loudly.
ginger, in the kitchen behind her, shrieked and swore with sudden fierceness; but between his outbursts anne heard a plaintive cry from the little building in the yard which served mr. harrison as a toolhouse.
anne flew to the door, unhasped it, and caught up a small mortal with a tearstained face who was sitting forlornly on an upturned nail keg.
""oh, dora, dora, what a fright you have given us!
how came you to be here?"
""davy and i came over to see ginger," sobbed dora, "but we could n't see him after all, only davy made him swear by kicking the door.
and then davy brought me here and run out and shut the door; and i could n't get out.
i cried and cried, i was frightened, and oh, i'm so hungry and cold; and i thought you'd never come, anne."
""davy?"
but anne could say no more.
she carried dora home with a heavy heart.
her joy at finding the child safe and sound was drowned out in the pain caused by davy's behavior.
the freak of shutting dora up might easily have been pardoned.
but davy had told falsehoods... downright coldblooded falsehoods about it.
that was the ugly fact and anne could not shut her eyes to it.
she could have sat down and cried with sheer disappointment.
she had grown to love davy dearly... how dearly she had not known until this minute... and it hurt her unbearably to discover that he was guilty of deliberate falsehood.
marilla listened to anne's tale in a silence that boded no good davy-ward; mr. barry laughed and advised that davy be summarily dealt with.
when he had gone home anne soothed and warmed the sobbing, shivering dora, got her her supper and put her to bed.
then she returned to the kitchen, just as marilla came grimly in, leading, or rather pulling, the reluctant, cobwebby davy, whom she had just found hidden away in the darkest corner of the stable.
she jerked him to the mat on the middle of the floor and then went and sat down by the east window.
anne was sitting limply by the west window.
between them stood the culprit.
his back was toward marilla and it was a meek, subdued, frightened back; but his face was toward anne and although it was a little shamefaced there was a gleam of comradeship in davy's eyes, as if he knew he had done wrong and was going to be punished for it, but could count on a laugh over it all with anne later on.
but no half hidden smile answered him in anne's gray eyes, as there might have done had it been only a question of mischief.
there was something else... something ugly and repulsive.
""how could you behave so, davy?"
she asked sorrowfully.
davy squirmed uncomfortably.
""i just did it for fun.
things have been so awful quiet here for so long that i thought it would be fun to give you folks a big scare.
it was, too."
in spite of fear and a little remorse davy grinned over the recollection.
""but you told a falsehood about it, davy," said anne, more sorrowfully than ever.
davy looked puzzled.
""what's a falsehood?
do you mean a whopper?"
""i mean a story that was not true."
""course i did," said davy frankly.
""if i had n't you would n't have been scared.
i had to tell it."
anne was feeling the reaction from her fright and exertions.
davy's impenitent attitude gave the finishing touch.
two big tears brimmed up in her eyes.
""oh, davy, how could you?"
she said, with a quiver in her voice.
""do n't you know how wrong it was?"
davy was aghast.
anne crying... he had made anne cry!
a flood of real remorse rolled like a wave over his warm little heart and engulfed it.
he rushed to anne, hurled himself into her lap, flung his arms around her neck, and burst into tears.
""i did n't know it was wrong to tell whoppers," he sobbed.
""how did you expect me to know it was wrong?
all mr. sprott's children told them regular every day, and cross their hearts too.
i s "pose paul irving never tells whoppers and here i've been trying awful hard to be as good as him, but now i s "pose you'll never love me again.
but i think you might have told me it was wrong.
i'm awful sorry i've made you cry, anne, and i'll never tell a whopper again."
davy buried his face in anne's shoulder and cried stormily.
anne, in a sudden glad flash of understanding, held him tight and looked over his curly thatch at marilla.
""he did n't know it was wrong to tell falsehoods, marilla.
i think we must forgive him for that part of it this time if he will promise never to say what is n't true again."
""i never will, now that i know it's bad," asseverated davy between sobs.
""if you ever catch me telling a whopper again you can..." davy groped mentally for a suitable penance... "you can skin me alive, anne."
""do n't say "whopper," davy... say "falsehood,"" said the schoolma'am.
""why?"
queried davy, settling comfortably down and looking up with a tearstained, investigating face.
""why ai n't whopper as good as falsehood?
i want to know.
it's just as big a word."
""it's slang; and it's wrong for little boys to use slang."
""there's an awful lot of things it's wrong to do," said davy with a sigh.
""i never s "posed there was so many.
i'm sorry it's wrong to tell whop... falsehoods,'cause it's awful handy, but since it is i'm never going to tell any more.
what are you going to do to me for telling them this time?
i want to know."
anne looked beseechingly at marilla.
""i do n't want to be too hard on the child," said marilla.
""i daresay nobody ever did tell him it was wrong to tell lies, and those sprott children were no fit companions for him.
poor mary was too sick to train him properly and i presume you could n't expect a six-year-old child to know things like that by instinct.
i suppose we'll just have to assume he does n't know anything right and begin at the beginning.
but he'll have to be punished for shutting dora up, and i ca n't think of any way except to send him to bed without his supper and we've done that so often.
ca n't you suggest something else, anne?
i should think you ought to be able to, with that imagination you're always talking of."
""but punishments are so horrid and i like to imagine only pleasant things," said anne, cuddling davy.
""there are so many unpleasant things in the world already that there is no use in imagining any more."
in the end davy was sent to bed, as usual, there to remain until noon next day.
he evidently did some thinking, for when anne went up to her room a little later she heard him calling her name softly.
going in, she found him sitting up in bed, with his elbows on his knees and his chin propped on his hands.
""anne," he said solemnly, "is it wrong for everybody to tell whop... falsehoods?
i want to know?"
""yes, indeed."
""is it wrong for a grown-up person?"
""yes."
""then," said davy decidedly, "marilla is bad, for she tells them.
and she's worse'n me, for i did n't know it was wrong but she does."
""davy keith, marilla never told a story in her life," said anne indignantly.
""she did so.
she told me last tuesday that something dreadful would happen to me if i did n't say my prayers every night.
and i have n't said them for over a week, just to see what would happen... and nothing has," concluded davy in an aggrieved tone.
anne choked back a mad desire to laugh with the conviction that it would be fatal, and then earnestly set about saving marilla's reputation.
""why, davy keith," she said solemnly, "something dreadful has happened to you this very day."
davy looked sceptical.
""i s "pose you mean being sent to bed without any supper," he said scornfully, "but that is n't dreadful.
course, i do n't like it, but i've been sent to bed so much since i come here that i'm getting used to it.
and you do n't save anything by making me go without supper either, for i always eat twice as much for breakfast."
""i do n't mean your being sent to bed.
i mean the fact that you told a falsehood today.
and, davy,"... anne leaned over the footboard of the bed and shook her finger impressively at the culprit... "for a boy to tell what is n't true is almost the worst thing that could happen to him... almost the very worst.
so you see marilla told you the truth."
""but i thought the something bad would be exciting," protested davy in an injured tone.
""marilla is n't to blame for what you thought.
bad things are n't always exciting.
they're very often just nasty and stupid."
""it was awful funny to see marilla and you looking down the well, though," said davy, hugging his knees.
anne kept a sober face until she got downstairs and then she collapsed on the sitting room lounge and laughed until her sides ached.
""i wish you'd tell me the joke," said marilla, a little grimly.
""i have n't seen much to laugh at today."
""you'll laugh when you hear this," assured anne.
and marilla did laugh, which showed how much her education had advanced since the adoption of anne.
but she sighed immediately afterwards.
""i suppose i should n't have told him that, although i heard a minister say it to a child once.
but he did aggravate me so.
it was that night you were at the carmody concert and i was putting him to bed.
he said he did n't see the good of praying until he got big enough to be of some importance to god.
anne, i do not know what we are going to do with that child.
i never saw his beat.
i'm feeling clean discouraged."
""oh, do n't say that, marilla.
remember how bad i was when i came here."
""anne, you never were bad... never.
i see that now, when i've learned what real badness is.
you were always getting into terrible scrapes, i'll admit, but your motive was always good.
davy is just bad from sheer love of it."
""oh, no, i do n't think it is real badness with him either," pleaded anne.
""it's just mischief.
and it is rather quiet for him here, you know.
he has no other boys to play with and his mind has to have something to occupy it.
dora is so prim and proper she is no good for a boy's playmate.
i really think it would be better to let them go to school, marilla."
""no," said marilla resolutely, "my father always said that no child should be cooped up in the four walls of a school until it was seven years old, and mr. allan says the same thing.
the twins can have a few lessons at home but go to school they sha n't till they're seven."
""well, we must try to reform davy at home then," said anne cheerfully.
""with all his faults he's really a dear little chap.
i ca n't help loving him.
marilla, it may be a dreadful thing to say, but honestly, i like davy better than dora, for all she's so good."
""i do n't know but that i do, myself," confessed marilla, "and it is n't fair, for dora is n't a bit of trouble.
there could n't be a better child and you'd hardly know she was in the house."
""dora is too good," said anne.
""she'd behave just as well if there was n't a soul to tell her what to do.
she was born already brought up, so she does n't need us; and i think," concluded anne, hitting on a very vital truth, "that we always love best the people who need us.
davy needs us badly."
""he certainly needs something," agreed marilla.
""rachel lynde would say it was a good spanking."
xi facts and fancies "teaching is really very interesting work," wrote anne to a queen's academy chum.
""jane says she thinks it is monotonous but i do n't find it so.
something funny is almost sure to happen every day, and the children say such amusing things.
jane says she punishes her pupils when they make funny speeches, which is probably why she finds teaching monotonous.
this afternoon little jimmy andrews was trying to spell "speckled" and could n't manage it.
"well," he said finally," i ca n't spell it but i know what it means.""
"what?"
i asked."
"st. clair donnell's face, miss."
""st. clair is certainly very much freckled, although i try to prevent the others from commenting on it... for i was freckled once and well do i remember it.
but i do n't think st. clair minds.
it was because jimmy called him "st. clair" that st. clair pounded him on the way home from school.
i heard of the pounding, but not officially, so i do n't think i'll take any notice of it.
""yesterday i was trying to teach lottie wright to do addition.
i said, "if you had three candies in one hand and two in the other, how many would you have altogether?'"
a mouthful," said lottie.
and in the nature study class, when i asked them to give me a good reason why toads should n't be killed, benjie sloane gravely answered, "because it would rain the next day."
""it's so hard not to laugh, stella.
i have to save up all my amusement until i get home, and marilla says it makes her nervous to hear wild shrieks of mirth proceeding from the east gable without any apparent cause.
she says a man in grafton went insane once and that was how it began.
""did you know that thomas a becket was canonized as a snake?
rose bell says he was... also that william tyndale wrote the new testament.
claude white says a "glacier" is a man who puts in window frames!
""i think the most difficult thing in teaching, as well as the most interesting, is to get the children to tell you their real thoughts about things.
one stormy day last week i gathered them around me at dinner hour and tried to get them to talk to me just as if i were one of themselves.
i asked them to tell me the things they most wanted.
some of the answers were commonplace enough... dolls, ponies, and skates.
others were decidedly original.
hester boulter wanted "to wear her sunday dress every day and eat in the sitting room."
hannah bell wanted "to be good without having to take any trouble about it."
marjory white, aged ten, wanted to be a widow.
questioned why, she gravely said that if you were n't married people called you an old maid, and if you were your husband bossed you; but if you were a widow there'd be no danger of either.
the most remarkable wish was sally bell's.
she wanted a "honeymoon."
i asked her if she knew what it was and she said she thought it was an extra nice kind of bicycle because her cousin in montreal went on a honeymoon when he was married and he had always had the very latest in bicycles!
""another day i asked them all to tell me the naughtiest thing they had ever done.
i could n't get the older ones to do so, but the third class answered quite freely.
eliza bell had "set fire to her aunt's carded rolls."
asked if she meant to do it she said, "not altogether."
she just tried a little end to see how it would burn and the whole bundle blazed up in a jiffy.
emerson gillis had spent ten cents for candy when he should have put it in his missionary box.
annetta bell's worst crime was "eating some blueberries that grew in the graveyard."
willie white had "slid down the sheephouse roof a lot of times with his sunday trousers on."
"but i was punished for it'cause i had to wear patched pants to sunday school all summer, and when you're punished for a thing you do n't have to repent of it," declared willie.
""i wish you could see some of their compositions... so much do i wish it that i'll send you copies of some written recently.
last week i told the fourth class i wanted them to write me letters about anything they pleased, adding by way of suggestion that they might tell me of some place they had visited or some interesting thing or person they had seen.
they were to write the letters on real note paper, seal them in an envelope, and address them to me, all without any assistance from other people.
last friday morning i found a pile of letters on my desk and that evening i realized afresh that teaching has its pleasures as well as its pains.
those compositions would atone for much.
here is ned clay's, address, spelling, and grammar as originally penned."
"miss teacher shirley green gabels.
p.e. island can birds" "dear teacher i think i will write you a composition about birds.
birds is very useful animals.
my cat catches birds.
his name is william but pa calls him tom.
he is oll striped and he got one of his ears froz of last winter.
only for that he would be a good-looking cat.
my unkle has adopted a cat.
it come to his house one day and woudent go away and unkle says it has forgot more than most people ever knowed.
he lets it sleep on his rocking chare and my aunt says he thinks more of it than he does of his children.
that is not right.
we ought to be kind to cats and give them new milk but we ought not be better to them than to our children.
this is oll i can think of so no more at present from edward blake clay.""
""st. clair donnell's is, as usual, short and to the point.
st. clair never wastes words.
i do not think he chose his subject or added the postscript out of malice aforethought.
it is just that he has not a great deal of tact or imagination.""
"dear miss shirley" "you told us to describe something strange we have seen.
i will describe the avonlea hall.
it has two doors, an inside one and an outside one.
it has six windows and a chimney.
it has two ends and two sides.
it is painted blue.
that is what makes it strange.
it is built on the lower carmody road.
it is the third most important building in avonlea.
the others are the church and the blacksmith shop.
they hold debating clubs and lectures in it and concerts."
"yours truly," "jacob donnell."
"p.s..
the hall is a very bright blue.""
""annetta bell's letter was quite long, which surprised me, for writing essays is not annetta's forte, and hers are generally as brief as st. clair's.
annetta is a quiet little puss and a model of good behavior, but there is n't a shadow of orginality in her.
here is her letter.
--" "dearest teacher," "i think i will write you a letter to tell you how much i love you.
i love you with my whole heart and soul and mind... with all there is of me to love... and i want to serve you for ever.
it would be my highest privilege.
that is why i try so hard to be good in school and learn my lessuns."
"you are so beautiful, my teacher.
your voice is like music and your eyes are like pansies when the dew is on them.
you are like a tall stately queen.
your hair is like rippling gold.
anthony pye says it is red, but you need n't pay any attention to anthony.""
i have only known you for a few months but i can not realize that there was ever a time when i did not know you... when you had not come into my life to bless and hallow it.
i will always look back to this year as the most wonderful in my life because it brought you to me.
besides, it's the year we moved to avonlea from newbridge.
my love for you has made my life very rich and it has kept me from much of harm and evil.
i owe this all to you, my sweetest teacher.""
i shall never forget how sweet you looked the last time i saw you in that black dress with flowers in your hair.
i shall see you like that for ever, even when we are both old and gray.
you will always be young and fair to me, dearest teacher.
i am thinking of you all the time... in the morning and at the noontide and at the twilight.
i love you when you laugh and when you sigh... even when you look disdainful.
i never saw you look cross though anthony pye says you always look so but i do n't wonder you look cross at him for he deserves it.
i love you in every dress... you seem more adorable in each new dress than the last."
"dearest teacher, good night.
the sun has set and the stars are shining... stars that are as bright and beautiful as your eyes.
i kiss your hands and face, my sweet.
may god watch over you and protect you from all harm."
""your afecksionate pupil," "annetta bell.""
""this extraordinary letter puzzled me not a little.
i knew annetta could n't have composed it any more than she could fly.
when i went to school the next day i took her for a walk down to the brook at recess and asked her to tell me the truth about the letter.
annetta cried and "fessed up freely.
she said she had never written a letter and she did n't know how to, or what to say, but there was bundle of love letters in her mother's top bureau drawer which had been written to her by an old "beau.""
"it was n't father," sobbed annetta, "it was someone who was studying for a minister, and so he could write lovely letters, but ma did n't marry him after all.
she said she could n't make out what he was driving at half the time.
but i thought the letters were sweet and that i'd just copy things out of them here and there to write you.
i put "teacher" where he put "lady" and i put in something of my own when i could think of it and i changed some words.
i put "dress" in place of "mood."
i did n't know just what a "mood" was but i s "posed it was something to wear.
i did n't s "pose you'd know the difference.
i do n't see how you found out it was n't all mine.
you must be awful clever, teacher."
""i told annetta it was very wrong to copy another person's letter and pass it off as her own.
but i'm afraid that all annetta repented of was being found out."
"and i do love you, teacher," she sobbed.
"it was all true, even if the minister wrote it first.
i do love you with all my heart."
""it's very difficult to scold anybody properly under such circumstances.
""here is barbara shaw's letter.
i ca n't reproduce the blots of the original."
"dear teacher," "you said we might write about a visit.
i never visited but once.
it was at my aunt mary's last winter.
my aunt mary is a very particular woman and a great housekeeper.
the first night i was there we were at tea.
i knocked over a jug and broke it.
aunt mary said she had had that jug ever since she was married and nobody had ever broken it before.
when we got up i stepped on her dress and all the gathers tore out of the skirt.
the next morning when i got up i hit the pitcher against the basin and cracked them both and i upset a cup of tea on the tablecloth at breakfast.
when i was helping aunt mary with the dinner dishes i dropped a china plate and it smashed.
that evening i fell downstairs and sprained my ankle and had to stay in bed for a week.
i heard aunt mary tell uncle joseph it was a mercy or i'd have broken everything in the house.
when i got better it was time to go home.
i do n't like visiting very much.
i like going to school better, especially since i came to avonlea."
"yours respectfully," "barbara shaw.""
""willie white's began," "respected miss," "i want to tell you about my very brave aunt.
she lives in ontario and one day she went out to the barn and saw a dog in the yard.
the dog had no business there so she got a stick and whacked him hard and drove him into the barn and shut him up.
pretty soon a man came looking for an inaginary lion" -lrb- query; -- did willie mean a menagerie lion? -rrb-
"that had run away from a circus.
and it turned out that the dog was a lion and my very brave aunt had druv him into the barn with a stick.
it was a wonder she was not et up but she was very brave.
emerson gillis says if she thought it was a dog she was n't any braver than if it really was a dog.
but emerson is jealous because he has n't got a brave aunt himself, nothing but uncles."""
i have kept the best for the last.
you laugh at me because i think paul is a genius but i am sure his letter will convince you that he is a very uncommon child.
paul lives away down near the shore with his grandmother and he has no playmates... no real playmates.
you remember our school management professor told us that we must not have "favorites" among our pupils, but i ca n't help loving paul irving the best of all mine.
i do n't think it does any harm, though, for everybody loves paul, even mrs. lynde, who says she could never have believed she'd get so fond of a yankee.
the other boys in school like him too.
there is nothing weak or girlish about him in spite of his dreams and fancies.
he is very manly and can hold his own in all games.
he fought st. clair donnell recently because st. clair said the union jack was away ahead of the stars and stripes as a flag.
the result was a drawn battle and a mutual agreement to respect each other's patriotism henceforth.
st. clair says he can hit the hardest but paul can hit the oftenest.""
""paul's letter."
"my dear teacher," "you told us we might write you about some interesting people we knew.
i think the most interesting people i know are my rock people and i mean to tell you about them.
i have never told anybody about them except grandma and father but i would like to have you know about them because you understand things.
there are a great many people who do not understand things so there is no use in telling them.""
"my rock people live at the shore.
i used to visit them almost every evening before the winter came.
now i ca n't go till spring, but they will be there, for people like that never change... that is the splendid thing about them.
nora was the first one of them i got acquainted with and so i think i love her the best.
she lives in andrews" cove and she has black hair and black eyes, and she knows all about the mermaids and the water kelpies.
you ought to hear the stories she can tell.
then there are the twin sailors.
they do n't live anywhere, they sail all the time, but they often come ashore to talk to me.
they are a pair of jolly tars and they have seen everything in the world... and more than what is in the world.
do you know what happened to the youngest twin sailor once?
he was sailing and he sailed right into a moonglade.
a moonglade is the track the full moon makes on the water when it is rising from the sea, you know, teacher.
well, the youngest twin sailor sailed along the moonglade till he came right up to the moon, and there was a little golden door in the moon and he opened it and sailed right through.
he had some wonderful adventures in the moon but it would make this letter too long to tell them.""
"then there is the golden lady of the cave.
one day i found a big cave down on the shore and i went away in and after a while i found the golden lady.
she has golden hair right down to her feet and her dress is all glittering and glistening like gold that is alive.
and she has a golden harp and plays on it all day long... you can hear the music any time along shore if you listen carefully but most people would think it was only the wind among the rocks.
i've never told nora about the golden lady.
i was afraid it might hurt her feelings.
it even hurt her feelings if i talked too long with the twin sailors."""
i always met the twin sailors at the striped rocks.
the youngest twin sailor is very good-tempered but the oldest twin sailor can look dreadfully fierce at times.
i have my suspicions about that oldest twin.
i believe he'd be a pirate if he dared.
there's really something very mysterious about him.
he swore once and i told him if he ever did it again he need n't come ashore to talk to me because i'd promised grandmother i'd never associate with anybody that swore.
he was pretty well scared, i can tell you, and he said if i would forgive him he would take me to the sunset.
so the next evening when i was sitting on the striped rocks the oldest twin came sailing over the sea in an enchanted boat and i got in her.
the boat was all pearly and rainbowy, like the inside of the mussel shells, and her sail was like moonshine.
well, we sailed right across to the sunset.
think of that, teacher, i've been in the sunset.
and what do you suppose it is?
the sunset is a land all flowers.
we sailed into a great garden, and the clouds are beds of flowers.
we sailed into a great harbor, all the color of gold, and i stepped right out of the boat on a big meadow all covered with buttercups as big as roses.
i stayed there for ever so long.
it seemed nearly a year but the oldest twin says it was only a few minutes.
you see, in the sunset land the time is ever so much longer than it is here.""
"your loving pupil paul irving.""
"p. s. of course, this letter is n't really true, teacher.
p.i."" xii a jonah day it really began the night before with a restless, wakeful vigil of grumbling toothache.
when anne arose in the dull, bitter winter morning she felt that life was flat, stale, and unprofitable.
she went to school in no angelic mood.
her cheek was swollen and her face ached.
the schoolroom was cold and smoky, for the fire refused to burn and the children were huddled about it in shivering groups.
anne sent them to their seats with a sharper tone than she had ever used before.
anthony pye strutted to his with his usual impertinent swagger and she saw him whisper something to his seat-mate and then glance at her with a grin.
never, so it seemed to anne, had there been so many squeaky pencils as there were that morning; and when barbara shaw came up to the desk with a sum she tripped over the coal scuttle with disastrous results.
the coal rolled to every part of the room, her slate was broken into fragments, and when she picked herself up, her face, stained with coal dust, sent the boys into roars of laughter.
anne turned from the second reader class which she was hearing.
""really, barbara," she said icily, "if you can not move without falling over something you'd better remain in your seat.
it is positively disgraceful for a girl of your age to be so awkward."
poor barbara stumbled back to her desk, her tears combining with the coal dust to produce an effect truly grotesque.
never before had her beloved, sympathetic teacher spoken to her in such a tone or fashion, and barbara was heartbroken.
anne herself felt a prick of conscience but it only served to increase her mental irritation, and the second reader class remember that lesson yet, as well as the unmerciful infliction of arithmetic that followed.
just as anne was snapping the sums out st. clair donnell arrived breathlessly.
""you are half an hour late, st. clair," anne reminded him frigidly.
""why is this?"
""please, miss, i had to help ma make a pudding for dinner'cause we're expecting company and clarice almira's sick," was st. clair's answer, given in a perfectly respectful voice but nevertheless provocative of great mirth among his mates.
""take your seat and work out the six problems on page eighty-four of your arithmetic for punishment," said anne.
st. clair looked rather amazed at her tone but he went meekly to his desk and took out his slate.
then he stealthily passed a small parcel to joe sloane across the aisle.
anne caught him in the act and jumped to a fatal conclusion about that parcel.
old mrs. hiram sloane had lately taken to making and selling "nut cakes" by way of adding to her scanty income.
the cakes were specially tempting to small boys and for several weeks anne had had not a little trouble in regard to them.
on their way to school the boys would invest their spare cash at mrs. hiram's, bring the cakes along with them to school, and, if possible, eat them and treat their mates during school hours.
anne had warned them that if they brought any more cakes to school they would be confiscated; and yet here was st. clair donnell coolly passing a parcel of them, wrapped up in the blue and white striped paper mrs. hiram used, under her very eyes.
""joseph," said anne quietly, "bring that parcel here."
joe, startled and abashed, obeyed.
he was a fat urchin who always blushed and stuttered when he was frightened.
never did anybody look more guilty than poor joe at that moment.
""throw it into the fire," said anne.
joe looked very blank.
""p... p... p... lease, m... m... miss," he began.
""do as i tell you, joseph, without any words about it."
""b... b... but m... m... miss... th... th... they're..." gasped joe in desperation.
""joseph, are you going to obey me or are you not?"
said anne.
a bolder and more self-possessed lad than joe sloane would have been overawed by her tone and the dangerous flash of her eyes.
this was a new anne whom none of her pupils had ever seen before.
joe, with an agonized glance at st. clair, went to the stove, opened the big, square front door, and threw the blue and white parcel in, before st. clair, who had sprung to his feet, could utter a word.
then he dodged back just in time.
for a few moments the terrified occupants of avonlea school did not know whether it was an earthquake or a volcanic explosion that had occurred.
the innocent looking parcel which anne had rashly supposed to contain mrs. hiram's nut cakes really held an assortment of firecrackers and pinwheels for which warren sloane had sent to town by st. clair donnell's father the day before, intending to have a birthday celebration that evening.
the crackers went off in a thunderclap of noise and the pinwheels bursting out of the door spun madly around the room, hissing and spluttering.
anne dropped into her chair white with dismay and all the girls climbed shrieking upon their desks.
joe sloane stood as one transfixed in the midst of the commotion and st. clair, helpless with laughter, rocked to and fro in the aisle.
prillie rogerson fainted and annetta bell went into hysterics.
it seemed a long time, although it was really only a few minutes, before the last pinwheel subsided.
anne, recovering herself, sprang to open doors and windows and let out the gas and smoke which filled the room.
then she helped the girls carry the unconscious prillie into the porch, where barbara shaw, in an agony of desire to be useful, poured a pailful of half frozen water over prillie's face and shoulders before anyone could stop her.
it was a full hour before quiet was restored... but it was a quiet that might be felt.
everybody realized that even the explosion had not cleared the teacher's mental atmosphere.
nobody, except anthony pye, dared whisper a word.
ned clay accidentally squeaked his pencil while working a sum, caught anne's eye and wished the floor would open and swallow him up.
the geography class were whisked through a continent with a speed that made them dizzy.
the grammar class were parsed and analyzed within an inch of their lives.
chester sloane, spelling "odoriferous" with two f's, was made to feel that he could never live down the disgrace of it, either in this world or that which is to come.
anne knew that she had made herself ridiculous and that the incident would be laughed over that night at a score of tea-tables, but the knowledge only angered her further.
in a calmer mood she could have carried off the situation with a laugh but now that was impossible; so she ignored it in icy disdain.
when anne returned to the school after dinner all the children were as usual in their seats and every face was bent studiously over a desk except anthony pye's.
he peered across his book at anne, his black eyes sparkling with curiosity and mockery.
anne twitched open the drawer of her desk in search of chalk and under her very hand a lively mouse sprang out of the drawer, scampered over the desk, and leaped to the floor.
anne screamed and sprang back, as if it had been a snake, and anthony pye laughed aloud.
then a silence fell... a very creepy, uncomfortable silence.
annetta bell was of two minds whether to go into hysterics again or not, especially as she did n't know just where the mouse had gone.
but she decided not to.
her sunbonnet had fallen back and some loose tendrils of her auburn hair were curling around her forehead.
her cheeks were so pink and her eyes so bright from running that she looked almost girlish.
""oh, mr. harrington," she said breathlessly, "that pet pig of bobbles" is in your garden again.
he only got in this minute.
i saw him coming and i ran right after him."
""he's there, all right," said harrington cheerfully, "but i'll get him out in a jiffy.
do n't tire yourself.
wo n't you go into the house and rest while i drive him around?"
mrs. hayden, however, was determined to help and they both went around to the garden, set the gate open, and tried to drive the pig out.
but harrington was not thinking about pigs, and mrs. hayden did not know quite so much about driving them as mordecai did; as a consequence they did not make much headway.
in her excitement mrs. hayden ran over beds and whatever came in her way, and harrington, in order to keep near her, ran after her.
between them they spoiled things about as much as a whole drove of pigs would have done.
but at last the pig grew tired of the fun, bolted out of the gate, and ran across the yard to his own place.
mrs. hayden followed slowly and harrington walked beside her.
""those pigs are all to be shut up tomorrow," she said.
""hiram has been fixing up a place for them in his spare moments and it is ready at last."
""oh, i would n't," said harrington hastily.
""it is n't good for pigs to be shut up so young.
you'd better let them run a while yet."
""no," said mrs. hayden decidedly.
""they have almost worried me to death already.
in they go tomorrow."
they were at the lane gate now, and harrington had to open it and let her pass through.
he felt quite desperate as he watched her trip up through the rows of apple trees, her blue gingham skirt brushing the lush grasses where a lacy tangle of sunbeams and shadows lay.
bobbles and ted came running to meet her and the three, hand in hand, disappeared from sight.
harrington went back to the house, feeling that life was flat, stale, and unprofitable.
that evening at the tea table he caught himself wondering what it would be like to see mary hayden sitting at his table in place of sarah king, with bobbles and ted on either hand.
then he found out what was the matter with him.
he was in love, fathoms deep, with the blue-eyed widow!
presumably the pigs were shut up the next day, for harrington's garden was invaded no more.
he stood it for a week and then surrendered at discretion.
he filled a basket with early strawberries and went across to the hayden place, boldly enough to all appearance, but with his heart thumping like any schoolboy's.
the front door stood hospitably open, flanked by rows of defiant red and yellow hollyhocks.
harrington paused on the step, with his hand outstretched to knock.
somewhere inside he heard a low sobbing.
forgetting all about knocking, he stepped softly in and walked to the door of the little sitting-room.
bobbles was standing behind him in the middle of the kitchen but harrington did not see him.
he was looking at mary hayden, who was sitting by the table in the room with her arms flung out over it and her head bowed on them.
she was crying softly in a hopeless fashion.
harrington put down his strawberries.
""mary!"
he exclaimed.
mrs. hayden straightened herself up with a start and looked at him, her lips quivering and her eyes full of tears.
""what is the matter?"
said harrington anxiously.
""is anything wrong?"
""oh, nothing much," said mrs. hayden, trying to recover herself.
""yes, there is too.
but it is very foolish of me to be going on like this.
i did n't know anyone was near.
and i was feeling so discouraged.
the colt broke his leg in the swamp pasture today and hiram had to shoot him.
it was ted's colt.
but there, there is no use in crying over it."
and by way of proving this, the poor, tired, overburdened little woman began to cry again.
she was past caring whether harrington saw her or not.
the woman-hater was so distressed that he forgot to be nervous.
he sat down and put his arm around her and spoke out what was in his mind without further parley.
""do n't cry, mary.
listen to me.
you were never meant to run a farm and be killed with worry.
you ought to be looked after and petted.
i want you to marry me and then everything will be all right.
i've loved you ever since that day i came over here and made you cry.
do you think you can like me a little, mary?"
it may be that mrs. hayden was not very much surprised, because harrington's face had been like an open book the day they chased the pig out of the garden together.
as for what she said, perhaps bobbles, who was surreptitiously gorging himself on harrington's strawberries, may tell you, but i certainly shall not.
the little brown house among the apple trees is shut up now and the boundary fence belongs to ancient history.
sarah king has gone also and mrs. john harrington reigns royally in her place.
bobbles and ted have a small, blue-eyed, much-spoiled sister, and there is a pig on the estate who may die of old age, but will never meet his doom otherwise.
it is bobbles" pig and one of the famous fourteen.
mordecai still shambles around and worships mrs. harrington.
the garden is the same as of yore, but the house is a different place and harrington is a different man.
and mordecai will tell you with a chuckle, "it was them notorious pigs as did it all."
why not ask miss price?
frances allen came in from the post office and laid an open letter on the table beside her mother, who was making mincemeat.
alma allen looked up from the cake she was frosting to ask, "what is the matter?
you look as if your letter contained unwelcome news, fan."
""so it does.
it is from aunt clara, to say she can not come.
she has received a telegram that her sister-in-law is very ill and she must go to her at once."
mrs. allen looked regretful, and alma cast her spoon away with a tragic air.
""that is too bad.
i feel as if our celebration were spoiled.
but i suppose it ca n't be helped."
""no," agreed frances, sitting down and beginning to peel apples.
""so there is no use in lamenting, or i would certainly sit down and cry, i feel so disappointed."
""is uncle frank coming?"
""yes, aunt clara says he will come down from stellarton if mrs. king does not get worse.
so that will leave just one vacant place.
we must invite someone to fill it up.
who shall it be?"
both girls looked rather puzzled.
mrs. allen smiled a quiet little smile all to herself and went on chopping suet.
she had handed the thanksgiving dinner over to frances and alma this year.
they were to attend to all the preparations and invite all the guests.
but although they had made or planned several innovations in the dinner itself, they had made no change in the usual list of guests.
""it must just be the time-honoured family affair," frances had declared.
""if we begin inviting other folks, there is no knowing when to draw the line.
we ca n't have more than fourteen, and some of our friends would be sure to feel slighted."
so the same old list it was.
but now aunt clara -- dear, jolly aunt clara, whom everybody in the connection loved and admired -- could not come, and her place must be filled.
""we ca n't invite the new minister, because we would have to have his sister, too," said frances.
""and there is no reason for asking any one of our girl chums more than another."
""mother, you will have to help us out," said alma.
""ca n't you suggest a substitute guest?"
mrs. allen looked down at the two bright, girlish faces turned up to her and said slowly, "i think i can, but i am not sure my choice will please you.
why not ask miss price?"
miss price!
they had never thought of her!
she was the pale, timid-looking little teacher in the primary department of the hazelwood school.
""miss price?"
repeated frances slowly.
""why, mother, we hardly know her.
she is dreadfully dull and quiet, i think."
""and so shy," said alma.
""why, at the wards" party the other night she looked startled to death if anyone spoke to her.
i believe she would be frightened to come here for thanksgiving."
""she is a very lonely little creature," said mrs. allen gently, "and does n't seem to have anyone belonging to her.
i think she would be very glad to get an invitation to spend thanksgiving elsewhere than in that cheerless little boarding-house where she lives."
""of course, if you would like to have her, mother, we will ask her," said frances.
""no, girls," said mrs. allen seriously.
""you must not ask miss price on my account, if you do not feel prepared to make her welcome for her own sake.
i had hoped that your own kind hearts might have prompted you to extend a little thanksgiving cheer in a truly thanksgiving spirit to a lonely, hard-working girl whose life i do not think is a happy one.
but there, i shall not preach.
this is your dinner, and you must please yourselves as to your guests."
frances and alma had both flushed, and they now remained silent for a few minutes.
then frances sprang up and threw her arms around her mother.
""you're right, mother dear, as you always are, and we are very selfish girls.
we will ask miss price and try to give her a nice time.
i'll go down this very evening and see her."
* * * * * in the grey twilight of the chilly autumn evening bertha price walked home to her boarding-house, her pale little face paler, and her grey eyes sadder than ever, in the fading light.
only two days until thanksgiving -- but there would be no real thanksgiving for her.
why, she asked herself rebelliously, when there seemed so much love in the world, was she denied her share?
her landlady met her in the hall.
""miss allen is in the parlour, miss price.
she wants to see you."
bertha went into the parlour somewhat reluctantly.
she had met frances allen only once or twice and she was secretly almost afraid of the handsome, vivacious girl who was so different from herself.
""i am sorry you have had to wait, miss allen," she said shyly.
""i went to see a pupil of mine who is ill and i was kept later than i expected."
""my errand wo n't take very long," said frances brightly.
""mother wants you to spend thanksgiving day with us, miss price, if you have no other engagement.
we will have a few other guests, but nobody outside our own family except mr. seeley, who is the law partner and intimate friend of my brother ernest in town.
you'll come, wo n't you?"
""oh, thank you, yes," said bertha, in pleased surprise.
""i shall be very glad to go.
why, it is so nice to think of it.
i expected my thanksgiving day to be lonely and sad -- not a bit thanksgivingy."
""we shall expect you then," said frances, with a cordial little hand-squeeze.
""come early in the morning, and we will have a real friendly, pleasant day."
that night frances said to her mother and sister, "you never saw such a transfigured face as miss price's when i asked her up.
she looked positively pretty -- such a lovely pink came out on her cheeks and her eyes shone like stars.
she reminded me so much of somebody i've seen, but i ca n't think who it is.
i'm so glad we've asked her here for thanksgiving!"
* * * * * thanksgiving came, as bright and beautiful as a day could be, and the allens" guests came with it.
bertha price was among them, paler and shyer than ever.
ernest allen and his friend, maxwell seeley, came out from town on the morning train.
after all the necessary introductions had been made, frances flew to the kitchen.
""i've found out who it is miss price reminds me of," she said, as she bustled about the range.
""it's max seeley.
you need n't laugh, al..
it's a fact.
i noticed it the minute i introduced them.
he's plump and prosperous and she's pinched and pale, but there's a resemblance nevertheless.
look for yourself and see if it is n't so."
back in the big, cheery parlour the thanksgiving guests were amusing themselves in various ways.
max seeley had given an odd little start when he was introduced to miss price, and as soon as possible he followed her to the corner where she had taken refuge.
ernest allen was out in the kitchen talking to his sisters, the "uncles and cousins and aunts" were all chattering to each other, and mr. seeley and miss price were quite unnoticed.
""you will excuse me, wo n't you, miss price, if i ask you something about yourself?"
he said eagerly.
""the truth is, you look so strikingly like someone i used to know that i feel sure you must be related to her.
i do not think i have any relatives of your name.
have you any of mine?"
bertha flushed, hesitated for an instant, then said frankly, "no, i do not think so.
but i may as well tell you that price is not my real name and i do not know what it is, although i think it begins with s. i believe that my parents died when i was about three years old, and i was then taken to an orphan asylum.
the next year i was taken from there and adopted by mrs. price.
she was very kind to me and treated me as her own daughter.
i had a happy home with her, although we were poor.
mrs. price wished me to bear her name, and i did so.
she never told me my true surname, perhaps she did not know it.
she died when i was sixteen, and since then i have been quite alone in the world.
that is all i know about myself."
max seeley was plainly excited.
""why do you think your real name begins with s?"
he asked.
""i have a watch which belonged to my mother, with the monogram "b.s." on the case.
it was left with the matron of the asylum and she gave it to mrs. price for me.
here it is."
max seeley almost snatched the old-fashioned little silver watch, from her hand and opened the case.
an exclamation escaped him as he pointed to some scratches on the inner side.
they looked like the initials m.a.s. "let me tell my story now," he said.
""my name is maxwell seeley.
my father died when i was seven years old, and my mother a year later.
my little sister, bertha, then three years old, and i were left quite alone and very poor.
we had no relatives.
i was adopted by a well-to-do old bachelor, who had known my father.
my sister was taken to an orphan asylum in a city some distance away.
i was very much attached to her and grieved bitterly over our parting.
my adopted father was very kind to me and gave me a good education.
i did not forget my sister, and as soon as i could i went to the asylum.
i found that she had been taken away long before, and i could not even discover who had adopted her, for the original building, with all its records, had been destroyed by fire two years previous to my visit.
i never could find any clue to her whereabouts, and long since gave up all hope of finding her.
but i have found her at last.
you are bertha seeley, my little sister!"
""oh -- can it be possible!"
""more than possible -- it is certain.
you are the image of my mother, as i remember her, and as an old daguerreotype i have pictures her.
and this is her watch -- see, i scratched my own initials on the case one day.
there is no doubt in the world.
oh, bertha, are you half as glad as i am?"
""glad!"
bertha's eyes were shining like stars.
she tried to smile, but burst into tears instead and her head went down on her brother's shoulder.
by this time everybody in the room was staring at the extraordinary tableau, and ernest, coming through the hall, gave a whistle of astonishment that brought the two in the corner back to a sense of their surroundings.
""i have n't suddenly gone crazy, ernest, old fellow," smiled max.
""ladies and gentlemen all, this little school-ma "am was introduced to you as miss price, but that was a mistake.
let me introduce her again as miss bertha seeley, my long-lost and newly-found sister."
well they had an amazing time then, of course.
they laughed and questioned and explained until the dinner was in imminent danger of getting stone-cold on the dining-room table.
luckily, alma and frances remembered it just in the nick of time, and they all got out, somehow, and into their places.
it was a splendid dinner, but i believe that maxwell and bertha seeley did n't know what they were eating, any more than if it had been sawdust.
however, the rest of the guests made up for that, and did full justice to the girls" cookery.
in the afternoon they all went to church, and at least two hearts were truly and devoutly thankful that day.
when the dusk came, ernest and maxwell had to catch the last train for town, and the other guests went home, with the exception of bertha, who was to stay all night.
just as soon as her resignation could be effected, she was to join her brother.
""meanwhile, i'll see about getting a house to put you in," said max.
""no more boarding out for me, ernest.
you may consider me as a family man henceforth."
frances and alma talked it all over before they went to sleep that night.
""just think," said frances, "if we had n't asked her here today she might never have found her brother!
it's all mother's doing, bless her!
things do happen like a storybook sometimes, do n't they, al?
_book_title_: lucy_maud_montgomery___lucy_maud_montgomery_short_stories,_1905_to_1906.txt.out
a correspondence and a climax at sunset sidney hurried to her room to take off the soiled and faded cotton dress she had worn while milking.
she had milked eight cows and pumped water for the milk-cans afterward in the fag-end of a hot summer day.
she did that every night, but tonight she had hurried more than usual because she wanted to get her letter written before the early farm bedtime.
she had been thinking it out while she milked the cows in the stuffy little pen behind the barn.
this monthly letter was the only pleasure and stimulant in her life.
existence would have been, so sidney thought, a dreary, unbearable blank without it.
she cast aside her milking-dress with a thrill of distaste that tingled to her rosy fingertips.
as she slipped into her blue-print afternoon dress her aunt called to her from below.
sidney ran out to the dark little entry and leaned over the stair railing.
below in the kitchen there was a hubbub of laughing, crying, quarrelling children, and a reek of bad tobacco smoke drifted up to the girl's disgusted nostrils.
aunt jane was standing at the foot of the stairs with a lamp in one hand and a year-old baby clinging to the other.
she was a big shapeless woman with a round good-natured face -- cheerful and vulgar as a sunflower was aunt jane at all times and occasions.
""i want to run over and see how mrs. brixby is this evening, siddy, and you must take care of the baby till i get back."
sidney sighed and went downstairs for the baby.
it never would have occurred to her to protest or be petulant about it.
she had all her aunt's sweetness of disposition, if she resembled her in nothing else.
she had not grumbled because she had to rise at four that morning, get breakfast, milk the cows, bake bread, prepare seven children for school, get dinner, preserve twenty quarts of strawberries, get tea, and milk the cows again.
all her days were alike as far as hard work and dullness went, but she accepted them cheerfully and uncomplainingly.
but she did resent having to look after the baby when she wanted to write her letter.
she carried the baby to her room, spread a quilt on the floor for him to sit on, and gave him a box of empty spools to play with.
fortunately he was a phlegmatic infant, fond of staying in one place, and not given to roaming about in search of adventures; but sidney knew she would have to keep an eye on him, and it would be distracting to literary effort.
she got out her box of paper and sat down by the little table at the window with a small kerosene lamp at her elbow.
the room was small -- a mere box above the kitchen which sidney shared with two small cousins.
her bed and the cot where the little girls slept filled up almost all the available space.
the furniture was poor, but everything was neat -- it was the only neat room in the house, indeed, for tidiness was no besetting virtue of aunt jane's.
opposite sidney was a small muslined and befrilled toilet-table, above which hung an eight-by-six-inch mirror, in which sidney saw herself reflected as she devoutly hoped other people did not see her.
just at that particular angle one eye appeared to be as large as an orange, while the other was the size of a pea, and the mouth zigzagged from ear to ear.
sidney hated that mirror as virulently as she could hate anything.
it seemed to her to typify all that was unlovely in her life.
the mirror of existence into which her fresh young soul had looked for twenty years gave back to her wistful gaze just such distortions of fair hopes and ideals.
half of the little table by which she sat was piled high with books -- old books, evidently well read and well-bred books, classics of fiction and verse every one of them, and all bearing on the flyleaf the name of sidney richmond, thereby meaning not the girl at the table, but her college-bred young father who had died the day before she was born.
her mother had died the day after, and sidney thereupon had come into the hands of good aunt jane, with those books for her dowry, since nothing else was left after the expenses of the double funeral had been paid.
one of the books had sidney richmond's name printed on the title-page instead of written on the flyleaf.
it was a thick little volume of poems, published in his college days -- musical, unsubstantial, pretty little poems, every one of which the girl sidney loved and knew by heart.
sidney dropped her pointed chin in her hands and looked dreamily out into the moonlit night, while she thought her letter out a little more fully before beginning to write.
her big brown eyes were full of wistfulness and romance; for sidney was romantic, albeit a faithful and understanding acquaintance with her father's books had given to her romance refinement and reason, and the delicacy of her own nature had imparted to it a self-respecting bias.
presently she began to write, with a flush of real excitement on her face.
in the middle of things the baby choked on a small twist spool and sidney had to catch him up by the heels and hold him head downward until the trouble was ejected.
then she had to soothe him, and finally write the rest of her letter holding him on one arm and protecting the epistle from the grabs of his sticky little fingers.
it was certainly letter-writing under difficulties, but sidney seemed to deal with them mechanically.
her soul and understanding were elsewhere.
four years before, when sidney was sixteen, still calling herself a schoolgirl by reason of the fact that she could be spared to attend school four months in the winter when work was slack, she had been much interested in the "maple leaf" department of the montreal weekly her uncle took.
it was a page given over to youthful canadians and filled with their contributions in the way of letters, verses, and prize essays.
noms de plume were signed to these, badges were sent to those who joined the maple leaf club, and a general delightful sense of mystery pervaded the department.
often a letter concluded with a request to the club members to correspond with the writer.
one such request went from sidney under the pen-name of "ellen douglas."
the girl was lonely in plainfield; she had no companions or associates such as she cared for; the maple leaf club represented all that her life held of outward interest, and she longed for something more.
only one answer came to "ellen douglas," and that was forwarded to her by the long-suffering editor of "the maple leaf."
it was from john lincoln of the bar n ranch, alberta.
he wrote that, although his age debarred him from membership in the club -lrb- he was twenty, and the limit was eighteen -rrb-, he read the letters of the department with much interest, and often had thought of answering some of the requests for correspondents.
he never had done so, but "ellen douglas's" letter was so interesting that he had decided to write to her.
would she be kind enough to correspond with him?
life on the bar n, ten miles from the outposts of civilization, was lonely.
he was two years out from the east, and had not yet forgotten to be homesick at times.
sidney liked the letter and answered it.
since then they had written to each other regularly.
there was nothing sentimental, hinted at or implied, in the correspondence.
whatever the faults of sidney's romantic visions were, they did not tend to precocious flirtation.
the plainfield boys, attracted by her beauty and repelled by her indifference and aloofness, could have told that.
she never expected to meet john lincoln, nor did she wish to do so.
in the correspondence itself she found her pleasure.
john lincoln wrote breezy accounts of ranch life and adventures on the far western plains, so alien and remote from snug, humdrum plainfield life that sidney always had the sensation of crossing a gulf when she opened a letter from the bar n.
as for sidney's own letter, this is the way it read as she wrote it: "the evergreens," plainfield.
dear mr. lincoln: the very best letter i can write in the half-hour before the carriage will be at the door to take me to mrs. braddon's dance shall be yours tonight.
i am sitting here in the library arrayed in my smartest, newest, whitest, silkiest gown, with a string of pearls which uncle james gave me today about my throat -- the dear, glistening, sheeny things!
and i am looking forward to the "dances and delight" of the evening with keen anticipation.
you asked me in your last letter if i did not sometimes grow weary of my endless round of dances and dinners and social functions.
no, no, never!
i enjoy every one of them, every minute of them.
i love life and its bloom and brilliancy; i love meeting new people; i love the ripple of music, the hum of laughter and conversation.
every morning when i awaken the new day seems to me to be a good fairy who will bring me some beautiful gift of joy.
the gift she gave me today was my sunset gallop on my grey mare lady.
the thrill of it is in my veins yet.
i distanced the others who rode with me and led the homeward canter alone, rocking along a dark, gleaming road, shadowy with tall firs and pines, whose balsam made all the air resinous around me.
before me was a long valley filled with purple dusk, and beyond it meadows of sunset and great lakes of saffron and rose where a soul might lose itself in colour.
on my right was the harbour, silvered over with a rising moon.
oh, it was all glorious -- the clear air with its salt-sea tang, the aroma of the pines, the laughter of my friends behind me, the spring and rhythm of lady's grey satin body beneath me!
i wanted to ride on so forever, straight into the heart of the sunset.
then home and to dinner.
we have a houseful of guests at present -- one of them an old statesman with a massive silver head, and eyes that have looked into people's thoughts so long that you have an uncanny feeling that they can see right through your soul and read motives you dare not avow even to yourself.
i was terribly in awe of him at first, but when i got acquainted with him i found him charming.
he is not above talking delightful nonsense even to a girl.
i sat by him at dinner, and he talked to me -- not nonsense, either, this time.
he told me of his political contests and diplomatic battles; he was wise and witty and whimsical.
i felt as if i were drinking some rare, stimulating mental wine.
what a privilege it is to meet such men and take a peep through their wise eyes at the fascinating game of empire-building!
i met another clever man a few evenings ago.
a lot of us went for a sail on the harbour.
mrs. braddon's house party came too.
we had three big white boats that skimmed down the moonlit channel like great white sea birds.
there was another boat far across the harbour, and the people in it were singing.
the music drifted over the water to us, so sad and sweet and beguiling that i could have cried for very pleasure.
one of mrs. braddon's guests said to me: "that is the soul of music with all its sense and earthliness refined away."
i had n't thought about him before -- i had n't even caught his name in the general introduction.
he was a tall, slight man, with a worn, sensitive face and iron-grey hair -- a quiet man who had n't laughed or talked.
but he began to talk to me then, and i forgot all about the others.
i never had listened to anybody in the least like him.
he talked of books and music, of art and travel.
he had been all over the world, and had seen everything everybody else had seen and everything they had n't too, i think.
i seemed to be looking into an enchanted mirror where all my own dreams and ideals were reflected back to me, but made, oh, so much more beautiful!
on my way home after the braddon people had left us somebody asked me how i liked paul moore!
the man i had been talking with was paul moore, the great novelist!
i was almost glad i had n't known it while he was talking to me -- i should have been too awed and reverential to have really enjoyed his conversation.
as it was, i had contradicted him twice, and he had laughed and liked it.
but his books will always have a new meaning to me henceforth, through the insight he himself has given me.
it is such meetings as these that give life its sparkle for me.
but much of its abiding sweetness comes from my friendship with margaret raleigh.
you will be weary of my rhapsodies over her.
but she is such a rare and wonderful woman; much older then i am, but so young in heart and soul and freshness of feeling!
she is to me mother and sister and wise, clear-sighted friend.
to her i go with all my perplexities and hopes and triumphs.
she has sympathy and understanding for my every mood.
i love life so much for giving me such a friendship!
this morning i wakened at dawn and stole away to the shore before anyone else was up.
i had a delightful run-away.
the long, low-lying meadows between "the evergreens" and the shore were dewy and fresh in that first light, that was as fine and purely tinted as the heart of one of my white roses.
on the beach the water was purring in little blue ripples, and, oh, the sunrise out there beyond the harbour!
all the eastern heaven was abloom with it.
and there was a wind that came dancing and whistling up the channel to replace the beautiful silence with a music more beautiful still.
the rest of the folks were just coming downstairs when i got back to breakfast.
they were all yawny, and some were grumpy, but i had washed my being in the sunrise and felt as blithesome as the day.
oh, life is so good to live!
tomorrow uncle james's new vessel, the white lady, is to be launched.
we are going to make a festive occasion of it, and i am to christen her with a bottle of cobwebby old wine.
but i hear the carriage, and aunt jane is calling me.
i had a great deal more to say -- about your letter, your big "round-up" and your tribulations with your chinese cook -- but i've only time now to say goodbye.
you wish me a lovely time at the dance and a full programme, do n't you?
yours sincerely, sidney richmond.
aunt jane came home presently and carried away her sleeping baby.
sidney said her prayers, went to bed, and slept soundly and serenely.
she mailed her letter the next day, and a month later an answer came.
sidney read it as soon as she left the post office, and walked the rest of the way home as in a nightmare, staring straight ahead of her with wide-open, unseeing brown eyes.
john lincoln's letter was short, but the pertinent paragraph of it burned itself into sidney's brain.
he wrote: i am going east for a visit.
it is six years since i was home, and it seems like three times six.
i shall go by the c.p.r., which passes through plainfield, and i mean to stop off for a day.
you will let me call and see you, wo n't you?
i shall have to take your permission for granted, as i shall be gone before a letter from you can reach the bar n. i leave for the east in five days, and shall look forward to our meeting with all possible interest and pleasure.
sidney did not sleep that night, but tossed restlessly about or cried in her pillow.
she was so pallid and hollow-eyed the next morning that aunt jane noticed it, and asked her what the matter was.
""nothing," said sidney sharply.
sidney had never spoken sharply to her aunt before.
the good woman shook her head.
she was afraid the child was "taking something."
""do n't do much today, siddy," she said kindly.
""just lie around and take it easy till you get rested up.
i'll fix you a dose of quinine."
sidney refused to lie around and take it easy.
she swallowed the quinine meekly enough, but she worked fiercely all day, hunting out superfluous tasks to do.
that night she slept the sleep of exhaustion, but her dreams were unenviable and the awakening was terrible.
any day, any hour, might bring john lincoln to plainfield.
what should she do?
hide from him?
refuse to see him?
but he would find out the truth just the same; she would lose his friendships and respect just as surely.
sidney trod the way of the transgressor, and found that its thorns pierced to bone and marrow.
everything had come to an end -- nothing was left to her!
in the untried recklessness of twenty untempered years she wished she could die before john lincoln came to plainfield.
the eyes of youth could not see how she could possibly live afterward.
* * * * * some days later a young man stepped from the c.p.r. train at plainfield station and found his way to the one small hotel the place boasted.
after getting his supper he asked the proprietor if he could direct him to "the evergreens."
caleb williams looked at his guest in bewilderment.
""never heerd o" such a place," he said.
""it is the name of mr. conway's estate -- mr. james conway," explained john lincoln.
""oh, jim conway's place!"
said caleb.
""did n't know that was what he called it.
sartin i kin tell you whar" to find it.
you see that road out thar"?
well, just follow it straight along for a mile and a half till you come to a blacksmith's forge.
jim conway's house is just this side of it on the right -- back from the road a smart piece and no other handy.
you ca n't mistake it."
john lincoln did not expect to mistake it, once he found it; he knew by heart what it appeared like from sidney's description: an old stately mansion of mellowed brick, covered with ivy and set back from the highway amid fine ancestral trees, with a pine-grove behind it, a river to the left, and a harbour beyond.
he strode along the road in the warm, ruddy sunshine of early evening.
it was not a bad-looking road at all; the farmsteads sprinkled along it were for the most part snug and wholesome enough; yet somehow it was different from what he had expected it to be.
and there was no harbour or glimpse of distant sea visible.
had the hotel-keeper made a mistake?
perhaps he had meant some other james conway.
presently he found himself before the blacksmith's forge.
beside it was a rickety, unpainted gate opening into a snake-fenced lane feathered here and there with scrubby little spruces.
it ran down a bare hill, crossed a little ravine full of young white-stemmed birches, and up another bare hill to an equally bare crest where a farmhouse was perched -- a farmhouse painted a stark, staring yellow and the ugliest thing in farmhouses that john lincoln had ever seen, even among the log shacks of the west.
he knew now that he had been misdirected, but as there seemed to be nobody about the forge he concluded that he had better go to the yellow house and inquire within.
he passed down the lane and over the little rustic bridge that spanned the brook.
just beyond was another home-made gate of poles.
lincoln opened it, or rather he had his hand on the hasp of twisted withes which secured it, when he was suddenly arrested by the apparition of a girl, who flashed around the curve of young birch beyond and stood before him with panting breath and quivering lips.
""i beg your pardon," said john lincoln courteously, dropping the gate and lifting his hat.
""i am looking for the house of mr. james conway -- "the evergreens."
can you direct me to it?"
""that is mr. james conway's house," said the girl, with the tragic air and tone of one driven to desperation and an impatient gesture of her hand toward the yellow nightmare above them.
""i do n't think he can be the one i mean," said lincoln perplexedly.
""the man i am thinking of has a niece, miss richmond."
""there is no other james conway in plainfield," said the girl.
""this is his place -- nobody calls it "the evergreens" but myself.
i am sidney richmond."
for a moment they looked at each other across the gate, sheer amazement and bewilderment holding john lincoln mute.
sidney, burning with shame, saw that this stranger was exceedingly good to look upon -- tall, clean-limbed, broad-shouldered, with clear-cut bronzed features and a chin and eyes that would have done honour to any man.
john lincoln, among all his confused sensations, was aware that this slim, agitated young creature before him was the loveliest thing he ever had seen, so lithe was her figure, so glossy and dark and silken her bare, wind-ruffled hair, so big and brown and appealing her eyes, so delicately oval her flushed cheeks.
he felt that she was frightened and in trouble, and he wanted to comfort and reassure her.
but how could she be sidney richmond?
""i do n't understand," he said perplexedly.
""oh!"
sidney threw out her hands in a burst of passionate protest.
""no, and you never will understand -- i ca n't make you understand."
""i do n't understand," said john lincoln again.
""can you be sidney richmond -- the sidney richmond who has written to me for four years?"
""i am."
""then, those letters --" "were all lies," said sidney bluntly and desperately.
""there was nothing true in them -- nothing at all.
this is my home.
we are poor.
everything i told you about it and my life was just imagination."
""then why did you write them?"
he asked blankly.
""why did you deceive me?"
""oh, i did n't mean to deceive you!
i never thought of such a thing.
when you asked me to write to you i wanted to, but i did n't know what to write about to a stranger.
i just could n't write you about my life here, not because it was hard, but it was so ugly and empty.
so i wrote instead of the life i wanted to live -- the life i did live in imagination.
and when once i had begun, i had to keep it up.
i found it so fascinating, too!
those letters made that other life seem real to me.
i never expected to meet you.
these last four days since your letter came have been dreadful to me.
oh, please go away and forgive me if you can!
i know i can never make you understand how it came about."
sidney turned away and hid her burning face against the cool white bark of the birch tree behind her.
it was worse than she had even thought it would be.
he was so handsome, so manly, so earnest-eyed!
oh, what a friend to lose!
john lincoln opened the gate and went up to her.
there was a great tenderness in his face, mingled with a little kindly, friendly amusement.
""please do n't distress yourself so, sidney," he said, unconsciously using her christian name.
""i think i do understand.
i'm not such a dull fellow as you take me for.
after all, those letters were true -- or, rather, there was truth in them.
you revealed yourself more faithfully in them than if you had written truly about your narrow outward life."
sidney turned her flushed face and wet eyes slowly toward him, a little smile struggling out amid the clouds of woe.
this young man was certainly good at understanding.
""you -- you'll forgive me then?"
she stammered.
""yes, if there is anything to forgive.
and for my own part, i am glad you are not what i have always thought you were.
if i had come here and found you what i expected, living in such a home as i expected, i never could have told you or even thought of telling you what you have come to mean to me in these lonely years during which your letters have been the things most eagerly looked forward to.
i should have come this evening and spent an hour or so with you, and then have gone away on the train tomorrow morning, and that would have been all.
""but i find instead just a dreamy romantic little girl, much like my sisters at home, except that she is a great deal cleverer.
and as a result i mean to stay a week at plainfield and come to see you every day, if you will let me.
and on my way back to the bar n i mean to stop off at plainfield again for another week, and then i shall tell you something more -- something it would be a little too bold to say now, perhaps, although i could say it just as well and truly.
all this if i may.
may i, sidney?"
he bent forward and looked earnestly into her face.
sidney felt a new, curious, inexplicable thrill at her heart.
""oh, yes.
-- i suppose so," she said shyly.
""now, take me up to the house and introduce me to your aunt jane," said john lincoln in satisfied tone.
an adventure on island rock "who was the man i saw talking to you in the hayfield?"
asked aunt kate, as uncle richard came to dinner.
""bob marks," said uncle richard briefly.
""i've sold laddie to him."
ernest hughes, the twelve-year-old orphan boy whom uncle "boarded and kept" for the chores he did, suddenly stopped eating.
""oh, mr. lawson, you're not going to sell laddie?"
he cried chokily.
uncle richard stared at him.
never before, in the five years that ernest had lived with him, had the quiet little fellow spoken without being spoken to, much less ventured to protest against anything uncle richard might do.
""certainly i am," answered the latter curtly.
""bob offered me twenty dollars for the dog, and he's coming after him next week."
""oh, mr. lawson," said ernest, rising to his feet, his small, freckled face crimson.
""oh, do n't sell laddie!
please, mr. lawson, do n't sell him!"
""what nonsense is this?"
said uncle richard sharply.
he was a man who brooked no opposition from anybody, and who never changed his mind when it was once made up.
""do n't sell laddie!"
pleaded ernest miserably.
""he is the only friend i've got.
i ca n't live if laddie goes away.
oh, do n't sell him, mr. lawson!"
""sit down and hold your tongue," said uncle richard sternly.
""the dog is mine, and i shall do with him as i think fit.
he is sold, and that is all there is about it.
go on with your dinner."
but ernest for the first time did not obey.
he snatched his cap from the back of his chair, dashed it down over his eyes, and ran from the kitchen with a sob choking his breath.
uncle richard looked angry, but aunt kate hastened to soothe him.
""do n't be vexed with the boy, richard," she said.
""you know he is very fond of laddie.
he's had to do with him ever since he was a pup, and no doubt he feels badly at the thought of losing him.
i'm rather sorry myself that you have sold the dog."
""well, he is sold and there's an end of it.
i do n't say but that the dog is a good dog.
but he is of no use to us, and twenty dollars will come in mighty handy just now.
he's worth that to bob, for he is a good watch dog, so we've both made a fair bargain."
nothing more was said about ernest or laddie.
i had taken no part in the discussion, for i felt no great interest in the matter.
laddie was a nice dog; ernest was a quiet, inoffensive little fellow, five years younger than myself; that was all i thought about either of them.
i was spending my vacation at uncle richard's farm on the nova scotian bay of fundy shore.
i was a great favourite with uncle richard, partly because he had been much attached to my mother, his only sister, partly because of my strong resemblance to his only son, who had died several years before.
uncle richard was a stern, undemonstrative man, but i knew that he entertained a deep and real affection for me, and i always enjoyed my vacation sojourns at his place.
""what are you going to do this afternoon, ned?"
he asked, after the disturbance caused by ernest's outbreak had quieted down.
""i think i'll row out to island rock," i replied.
""i want to take some views of the shore from it."
uncle richard nodded.
he was much interested in my new camera.
""if you're on it about four o'clock, you'll get a fine view of the "hole in the wall" when the sun begins to shine on the water through it," he said.
""i've often thought it would make a handsome picture."
""after i've finished taking the pictures, i think i'll go down shore to uncle adam's and stay all night," i said.
""jim's dark room is more convenient than mine, and he has some pictures he is going to develop tonight, too."
i started for the shore about two o'clock.
ernest was sitting on the woodpile as i passed through the yard, with his arms about laddie's neck and his face buried in laddie's curly hair.
laddie was a handsome and intelligent black-and-white newfoundland, with a magnificent coat.
he and ernest were great chums.
i felt sorry for the boy who was to lose his pet.
""do n't take it so hard, ern," i said, trying to comfort him.
""uncle will likely get another pup."
""i do n't want any other pup!"
ernest blurted out.
""oh, ned, wo n't you try and coax your uncle not to sell him?
perhaps he'd listen to you."
i shook my head.
i knew uncle richard too well to hope that.
""not in this case, ern," i said.
""he would say it did not concern me, and you know nothing moves him when he determines on a thing.
you'll have to reconcile yourself to losing laddie, i'm afraid."
ernest's tow-coloured head went down on laddie's neck again, and i, deciding that there was no use in saying anything more, proceeded towards the shore, which was about a mile from uncle richard's house.
the beach along his farm and for several farms along shore was a lonely, untenanted one, for the fisher-folk all lived two miles further down, at rowley's cove.
about three hundred yards from the shore was the peculiar formation known as island rock.
this was a large rock that stood abruptly up out of the water.
below, about the usual water-line, it was seamed and fissured, but its summit rose up in a narrow, flat-topped peak.
at low tide twenty feet of it was above water, but at high tide it was six feet and often more under water.
i pushed uncle richard's small flat down the rough path and rowed out to island rock.
arriving there, i thrust the painter deep into a narrow cleft.
this was the usual way of mooring it, and no doubt of its safety occurred to me.
i scrambled up the rock and around to the eastern end, where there was a broader space for standing and from which some capital views could be obtained.
the sea about the rock was calm, but there was quite a swell on and an off-shore breeze was blowing.
there were no boats visible.
the tide was low, leaving bare the curious caves and headlands along shore, and i secured a number of excellent snapshots.
it was now three o'clock.
i must wait another hour yet before i could get the best view of the "hole in the wall" -- a huge, arch-like opening through a jutting headland to the west of me.
i went around to look at it, when i saw a sight that made me stop short in dismay.
this was nothing less than the flat, drifting outward around the point.
the swell and suction of the water around the rock must have pulled her loose -- and i was a prisoner!
at first my only feeling was one of annoyance.
then a thought flashed into my mind that made me dizzy with fear.
the tide would be high that night.
if i could not escape from island rock i would inevitably be drowned.
i sat down limply on a ledge and tried to look matters fairly in the face.
i could not swim; calls for help could not reach anybody; my only hope lay in the chance of somebody passing down the shore or of some boat appearing.
i looked at my watch.
it was a quarter past three.
the tide would begin to turn about five, but it would be at least ten before the rock would be covered.
i had, then, little more than six hours to live unless rescued.
the flat was by this time out of sight around the point.
i hoped that the sight of an empty flat drifting down shore might attract someone's attention and lead to investigation.
that seemed to be my only hope.
no alarm would be felt at uncle richard's because of my non-appearance.
they would suppose i had gone to uncle adam's.
i have heard of time seeming long to a person in my predicament, but to me it seemed fairly to fly, for every moment decreased my chance of rescue.
i determined i would not give way to cowardly fear, so, with a murmured prayer for help, i set myself to the task of waiting for death as bravely as possible.
at intervals i shouted as loudly as i could and, when the sun came to the proper angle for the best view of the "hole in the wall," i took the picture.
it afterwards turned out to be a great success, but i have never been able to look at it without a shudder.
at five the tide began to come in.
very, very slowly the water rose around island rock.
up, up, up it came, while i watched it with fascinated eyes, feeling like a rat in a trap.
the sun fell lower and lower; at eight o'clock the moon rose large and bright; at nine it was a lovely night, dear, calm, bright as day, and the water was swishing over the highest ledge of the rock.
with some difficulty i climbed to the top and sat there to await the end.
i had no longer any hope of rescue but, by a great effort, i preserved self-control.
if i had to die, i would at least face death staunchly.
but when i thought of my mother at home, it tasked all my energies to keep from breaking down utterly.
suddenly i heard a whistle.
never was sound so sweet.
i stood up and peered eagerly shoreward.
coming around the "hole in the wall" headland, on top of the cliffs, i saw a boy and a dog.
i sent a wild halloo ringing shoreward.
the boy started, stopped and looked out towards island rock.
the next moment he hailed me.
it was ernest's voice, and it was laddie who was barking beside him.
""ernest," i shouted wildly, "run for help -- quick!
quick!
the tide will be over the rock in half an hour!
hurry, or you will be too late!"
instead of starting off at full speed, as i expected him to do, ernest stood still for a moment, and then began to pick his steps down a narrow path over the cliff, followed by laddie.
""ernest," i shouted frantically, "what are you doing?
why do n't you go for help?"
ernest had by this time reached a narrow ledge of rock just above the water-line.
i noticed that he was carrying something over his arm.
""it would take too long," he shouted.
""by the time i got to the cove and a boat could row back here, you'd be drowned.
laddie and i will save you.
is there anything there you can tie a rope to?
i've a coil of rope here that i think will be long enough to reach you.
i've been down to the cove and alec martin sent it up to your uncle."
i looked about me; a smooth, round hole had been worn clean through a thin part of the apex of the rock.
""i could fasten the rope if i had it!"
i called.
""but how can you get it to me?"
for answer ernest tied a bit of driftwood to the rope and put it into laddie's mouth.
the next minute the dog was swimming out to me.
as soon as he came close i caught the rope.
it was just long enough to stretch from shore to rock, allowing for a couple of hitches which ernest gave around a small boulder on the ledge.
i tied my camera case on my head by means of some string i found in my pocket, then i slipped into the water and, holding to the rope, went hand over hand to the shore with laddie swimming beside me.
ernest held on to the shoreward end of the rope like grim death, a task that was no light one for his small arms.
when i finally scrambled up beside him, his face was dripping with perspiration and he trembled like a leaf.
""ern, you are a brick!"
i exclaimed.
""you've saved my life!"
""no, it was laddie," said ernest, refusing to take any credit at all.
we hurried home and arrived at uncle richard's about ten, just as they were going to bed.
when uncle richard heard what had happened, he turned very pale, and murmured, "thank god!"
aunt kate got me out of my wet clothes as quickly as possible, put me away to bed in hot blankets and dosed me with ginger tea.
i slept like a top and felt none the worse for my experience the next morning.
at the breakfast table uncle richard scarcely spoke.
but, just as we finished, he said abruptly to ernest, "i'm not going to sell laddie.
you and the dog saved ned's life between you, and no dog who helped do that is ever going to be sold by me.
henceforth he belongs to you.
i give him to you for your very own."
""oh, mr. lawson!"
said ernest, with shining eyes.
i never saw a boy look so happy.
as for laddie, who was sitting beside him with his shaggy head on ernest's knee, i really believe the dog understood, too.
the look in his eyes was almost human.
uncle richard leaned over and patted him.
""good dog!"
he said.
""good dog!"
at five o'clock in the morning fate, in the guise of mrs. emory dropping a milk-can on the platform under his open window, awakened murray that morning.
had not mrs. emory dropped that can, he would have slumbered peacefully until his usual hour for rising -- a late one, be it admitted, for of all the boarders at sweetbriar cottage murray was the most irregular in his habits.
""when a young man," mrs. emory was wont to remark sagely and a trifle severely, "prowls about that pond half of the night, a-chasing of things what he calls "moonlight effecks," it ai n't to be wondered at that he's sleepy in the morning.
and it ai n't the convenientest thing, nuther and noways, to keep the breakfast table set till the farm folks are thinking of dinner.
but them artist men are not like other people, say what you will, and allowance has to be made for them.
and i must say that i likes him real well and approves of him every other way."
if murray had slept late that morning -- well, he shudders yet over that "if."
but aforesaid fate saw to it that he woke when the hour of destiny and the milk-can struck, and having awakened he found he could not go to sleep again.
it suddenly occurred to him that he had never seen a sunrise on the pond.
doubtless it would be very lovely down there in those dewy meadows at such a primitive hour; he decided to get up and see what the world looked like in the young daylight.
he scowled at a letter lying on his dressing table and thrust it into his pocket that it might be out of sight.
he had written it the night before and the writing of it was going to cost him several things -- a prospective million among others.
so it is hardly to be wondered at if the sight of it did not reconcile him to the joys of early rising.
""dear life and heart!"
exclaimed mrs. emory, pausing in the act of scalding a milk-can when murray emerged from a side door.
""what on earth is the matter, mr. murray?
you ai n't sick now, surely?
i told you them pond fogs was p "isen after night!
if you've gone and got --" "nothing is the matter, dear lady," interrupted murray, "and i have n't gone and got anything except an acute attack of early rising which is not in the least likely to become chronic.
but at what hour of the night do you get up, you wonderful woman?
or rather do you ever go to bed at all?
here is the sun only beginning to rise and -- positively yes, you have all your cows milked."
mrs. emory purred with delight.
""folks as has fourteen cows to milk has to rise betimes," she answered with proud humility.
""laws, i do n't complain -- i've lots of help with the milking.
how mrs. palmer manages, i really can not comperhend -- or rather, how she has managed.
i suppose she'll be all right now since her niece came last night.
i saw her posting to the pond pasture not ten minutes ago.
she'll have to milk all them seven cows herself.
but dear life and heart!
here i be palavering away and not a bite of breakfast ready for you!"
""i do n't want any breakfast until the regular time for it," assured murray.
""i'm going down to the pond to see the sun rise."
""now do n't you go and get caught in the ma "sh," anxiously called mrs. emory, as she never failed to do when she saw him starting for the pond.
nobody ever had got caught in the marsh, but mrs. emory lived in a chronic state of fear lest someone should.
""and if you once got stuck in that black mud you'd be sucked right down and never seen or heard tell of again till the day of judgment, like adam palmer's cow," she was wont to warn her boarders.
murray sought his favourite spot for pond dreaming -- a bloomy corner of the pasture that ran down into the blue water, with a dump of leafy maples on the left.
he was very glad he had risen early.
a miracle was being worked before his very eyes.
the world was in a flush and tremor of maiden loveliness, instinct with all the marvellous fleeting charm of girlhood and spring and young morning.
overhead the sky was a vast high-sprung arch of unstained crystal.
down over the sand dunes, where the pond ran out into the sea, was a great arc of primrose smitten through with auroral crimsonings.
beneath it the pond waters shimmered with a hundred fairy hues, but just before him they were clear as a flawless mirror.
the fields around him glistened with dews, and a little wandering wind, blowing lightly from some bourne in the hills, strayed down over the slopes, bringing with it an unimaginable odour and freshness, and fluttered over the pond, leaving a little path of dancing silver ripples across the mirror-glory of the water.
birds were singing in the beech woods over on orchard knob farm, answering to each other from shore to shore, until the very air was tremulous with the elfin music of this wonderful midsummer dawn.
""i will get up at sunrise every morning of my life hereafter," exclaimed murray rapturously, not meaning a syllable of it, but devoutly believing he did.
just as the fiery disc of the sun peered over the sand dunes murray heard music that was not of the birds.
it was a girl's voice singing beyond the maples to his left -- a clear sweet voice, blithely trilling out the old-fashioned song, "five o'clock in the morning."
""mrs. palmer's niece!"
murray sprang to his feet and tiptoed cautiously through the maples.
he had heard so much from mrs. palmer about her niece that he felt reasonably well acquainted with her.
moreover, mrs. palmer had assured him that mollie was a very pretty girl.
now a pretty girl milking cows at sunrise in the meadows sounded well.
mrs. palmer had not over-rated her niece's beauty.
murray said so to himself with a little whistle of amazement as he leaned unseen on the pasture fence and looked at the girl who was milking a placid jersey less than ten yards away from him.
murray's artistic instinct responded to the whole scene with a thrill of satisfaction.
he could see only her profile, but that was perfect, and the colouring of the oval cheek and the beautiful curve of the chin were something to adore.
her hair, ruffled into lovable little ringlets by the morning wind, was coiled in glistening chestnut masses high on her bare head, and her arms, bare to the elbow, were as white as marble.
presently she began to sing again, and this time murray joined in.
she half rose from her milking stool and cast a startled glance at the maples.
then she dropped back again and began to milk determinedly, but murray could have sworn that he saw a demure smile hovering about her lips.
that, and the revelation of her full face, decided him.
he sprang over the fence and sauntered across the intervening space of lush clover blossoms.
""good morning," he said coolly.
he had forgotten her other name, and it did not matter; at five o'clock in the morning people who met in dewy clover fields might disregard the conventionalities.
""is n't it rather a large contract for you to be milking seven cows all alone?
may i help you?"
mollie looked up at him over her shoulder.
she had glorious grey eyes.
her face was serene and undisturbed.
""can you milk?"
she asked.
""unlikely as it may seem, i can," said murray.
""i have never confessed it to mrs. emory, because i was afraid she would inveigle me into milking her fourteen cows.
but i do n't mind helping you.
i learned to milk when i was a shaver on my vacations at a grandfatherly farm.
may i have that extra pail?"
murray captured a milking stool and rounded up another jersey.
before sitting down he seemed struck with an idea.
""my name is arnold murray.
i board at sweetbriar cottage, next farm to orchard knob.
that makes us near neighbours."
""i suppose it does," said mollie.
murray mentally decided that her voice was the sweetest he had ever heard.
he was glad he had arranged his cow at such an angle that he could study her profile.
it was amazing that mrs. palmer's niece should have such a profile.
it looked as if centuries of fine breeding were responsible for it.
""what a morning!"
he said enthusiastically.
""it harks back to the days when earth was young.
they must have had just such mornings as this in eden."
""do you always get up so early?"
asked mollie practically.
""always," said murray without a blush.
then -- "but no, that is a fib, and i can not tell fibs to you.
the truth is your tribute.
i never get up early.
it was fate that roused me and brought me here this morning.
the morning is a miracle -- and you, i might suppose you were born of the sunrise, if mrs. palmer had n't told me all about you."
""what did she tell you about me?"
asked mollie, changing cows.
murray discovered that she was tall and that the big blue print apron shrouded a singularly graceful figure.
""she said you were the best-looking girl in bruce county.
i have seen very few of the girls in bruce county, but i know she is right."
""that compliment is not nearly so pretty as the sunrise one," said mollie reflectively.
""mrs. palmer has told me things about you," she added.
""curiosity knows no gender," hinted murray.
""she said you were good-looking and lazy and different from other people."
""all compliments," said murray in a gratified tone.
""lazy?"
""certainly.
laziness is a virtue in these strenuous days, i was not born with it, but i have painstakingly acquired it, and i am proud of my success.
i have time to enjoy life."
""i think that i like you," said mollie.
""you have the merit of being able to enter into a situation," he assured her.
when the last jersey was milked they carried the pails down to the spring where the creamers were sunk and strained the milk into them.
murray washed the pails and mollie wiped them and set them in a gleaming row on the shelf under a big maple.
""thank you," she said.
""you are not going yet," said murray resolutely.
""the time i saved you in milking three cows belongs to me.
we will spend it in a walk along the pond shore.
i will show you a path i have discovered under the beeches.
it is just wide enough for two.
come."
he took her hand and drew her through the copse into a green lane, where the ferns grew thickly on either side and the pond waters plashed dreamily below them.
he kept her hand in his as they went down the path, and she did not try to withdraw it.
about them was the great, pure silence of the morning, faintly threaded with caressing sounds -- croon of birds, gurgle of waters, sough of wind.
the spirit of youth and love hovered over them and they spoke no word.
when they finally came out on a little green nook swimming in early sunshine and arched over by maples, with the wide shimmer of the pond before it and the gold dust of blossoms over the grass, the girl drew a long breath of delight.
""it is a morning left over from eden, is n't it?"
said murray.
""yes," said mollie softly.
murray bent toward her.
""you are eve," he said.
""you are the only woman in the world -- for me.
adam must have told eve just what he thought about her the first time he saw her.
there were no conventionalities in eden -- and people could not have taken long to make up their minds.
we are in eden just now.
one can say what he thinks in eden without being ridiculous.
you are divinely fair, eve.
your eyes are stars of the morning -- your cheek has the flush it stole from the sunrise-your lips are redder than the roses of paradise.
and i love you, eve."
mollie lowered her eyes and the long fringe of her lashes lay in a burnished semi-circle on her cheek.
""i think," she said slowly, "that it must have been very delightful in eden.
but we are not really there, you know -- we are only playing that we are.
and it is time for me to go back.
i must get the breakfast -- that sounds too prosaic for paradise."
murray bent still closer.
""before we remember that we are only playing at paradise, will you kiss me, dear eve?"
""you are very audacious," said mollie coldly.
""we are in eden yet," he urged.
""that makes all the difference."
""well," said mollie.
and murray kissed her.
they had passed back over the fern path and were in the pasture before either spoke again.
then murray said, "we have left eden behind -- but we can always return there when we will.
and although we were only playing at paradise, i was not playing at love.
i meant all i said, mollie."
""have you meant it often?"
asked mollie significantly.
""i never meant it -- or even played at it -- before," he answered.
""i did -- at one time -- contemplate the possibility of playing at it.
but that was long ago -- as long ago as last night.
i am glad to the core of my soul that i decided against it before i met you, dear eve.
i have the letter of decision in my coat pocket this moment.
i mean to mail it this afternoon.""
"curiosity knows no gender,"" quoted mollie.
""then, to satisfy your curiosity, i must bore you with some personal history.
my parents died when i was a little chap, and my uncle brought me up.
he has been immensely good to me, but he is a bit of a tyrant.
recently he picked out a wife for me -- the daughter of an old sweetheart of his.
i have never even seen her.
but she has arrived in town on a visit to some relatives there.
uncle dick wrote to me to return home at once and pay my court to the lady; i protested.
he wrote again -- a letter, short and the reverse of sweet.
if i refused to do my best to win miss mannering he would disown me -- never speak to me again -- cut me off with a quarter.
uncle always means what he says -- that is one of our family traits, you understand.
i spent some miserable, undecided days.
it was not the threat of disinheritance that worried me, although when you have been brought up to regard yourself as a prospective millionaire it is rather difficult to adjust your vision to a pauper focus.
but it was the thought of alienating uncle dick.
i love the dear, determined old chap like a father.
but last night my guardian angel was with me and i decided to remain my own man.
so i wrote to uncle dick, respectfully but firmly declining to become a candidate for miss mannering's hand."
""but you have never seen her," said mollie.
""she may be -- almost -- charming.""
"if she be not fair to me, what care i how fair she be?""
quoted murray.
""as you say, she may be -- almost charming; but she is not eve.
she is merely one of a million other women, as far as i am concerned.
do n't let's talk of her.
let us talk only of ourselves -- there is nothing else that is half so interesting."
""and will your uncle really cast you off?"
asked mollie.
""not a doubt of it."
""what will you do?"
""work, dear eve.
my carefully acquired laziness must be thrown to the winds and i shall work.
that is the rule outside of eden.
do n't worry.
i've painted pictures that have actually been sold.
i'll make a living for us somehow."
""us?"
""of course.
you are engaged to me."
""i am not," said mollie indignantly.
""mollie!
mollie!
after that kiss!
fie, fie!"
""you are very absurd," said mollie, "but your absurdity has been amusing.
i have -- yes, positively -- i have enjoyed your eden comedy.
but now you must not come any further with me.
my aunt might not approve.
here is my path to orchard knob farmhouse.
there, i presume, is yours to sweetbriar cottage.
good morning."
""i am coming over to see you this afternoon," said murray coolly.
""but you need n't be afraid.
i will not tell tales out of eden.
i will be a hypocrite and pretend to mrs. palmer that we have never met before.
but you and i will know and remember.
now, you may go.
i reserve to myself the privilege of standing here and watching you out of sight."
* * * * * that afternoon murray strolled over to orchard knob, going into the kitchen without knocking as was the habit in that free and easy world.
mrs. palmer was lying on the lounge with a pungent handkerchief bound about her head, but keeping a vigilant eye on a very pretty, very plump brown-eyed girl who was stirring a kettleful of cherry preserve on the range.
""good afternoon, mrs. palmer," said murray, wondering where mollie was.
""i'm sorry to see that you look something like an invalid."
""i've a raging, ramping headache," said mrs. palmer solemnly.
""i had it all night and i'm good for nothing.
mollie, you'd better take them cherries off.
mr. murray, this is my niece, mollie booth."
""what?"
said murray explosively.
""miss mollie booth," repeated mrs. palmer in a louder tone.
murray regained outward self-control and bowed to the blushing mollie.
""and what about eve?"
he thought helplessly.
""who -- what was she?
did i dream her?
was she a phantom of delight?
no, no, phantoms do n't milk cows.
she was flesh and blood.
no chilly nymph exhaling from the mists of the marsh could have given a kiss like that."
""mollie has come to stay the rest of the summer with me," said mrs. palmer.
""i hope to goodness my tribulations with hired girls is over at last.
they have made a wreck of me."
murray rapidly reflected.
this development, he decided, released him from his promise to tell no tales.
""i met a young lady down in the pond pasture this morning," he said deliberately.
""i talked with her for a few minutes.
i supposed her to be your niece.
who was she?"
""oh, that was miss mannering," said mrs. palmer.
""what?"
said murray again.
""mannering -- dora mannering," said mrs. palmer loudly, wondering if mr. murray were losing his hearing.
""she came here last night just to see me.
i have n't seen her since she was a child of twelve.
i used to be her nurse before i was married.
i was that proud to think she thought it worth her while to look me up.
and, mind you, this morning, when she found me crippled with headache and not able to do a hand's turn, that girl, mr. murray, went and milked seven cows" -- "only four," murmured murray, but mrs. palmer did not hear him -- "for me.
could n't prevent her.
she said she had learned to milk for fun one summer when she was in the country, and she did it.
and then she got breakfast for the men -- mollie did n't come till the ten o'clock train.
miss mannering is as capable as if she had been riz on a farm."
""where is she now?"
demanded murray.
""oh, she's gone."
""what?"
""gone," shouted mrs. palmer, "gone.
she left on the train mollie come on.
gracious me, has the man gone crazy?
he has n't seemed like himself at all this afternoon."
murray had bolted madly out of the house and was striding down the lane.
blind fool -- unspeakable idiot that he had been!
to take her for mrs. palmer's niece -- that peerless creature with the calm acceptance of any situation, which marked the woman of the world, with the fine appreciation and quickness of repartee that spoke of generations of culture -- to imagine that she could be mollie booth!
he had been blind, besottedly blind.
and now he had lost her!
she would never forgive him; she had gone without a word or sign.
as he reached the last curve of the lane where it looped about the apple trees, a plump figure came flying down the orchard slope.
""mr. murray, mr. murray," mollie booth called breathlessly.
""will you please come here just a minute?"
murray crossed over to the paling rather grumpily.
he did not want to talk with mollie booth just then.
confound it, what did the girl want?
why was she looking so mysterious?
mollie produced a little square grey envelope from some feminine hiding place and handed it over the paling.
""she give me this at the station -- miss mannering did," she gasped, "and asked me to give it to you without letting aunt emily jane see.
i could n't get a chanst when you was in, but as soon as you went i slipped out by the porch door and followed you.
you went so fast i near died trying to head you off."
""you dear little soul," said murray, suddenly radiant.
""it is too bad you have had to put yourself so out of breath on my account.
but i am immensely obliged to you.
the next time your young man wants a trusty private messenger just refer him to me."
""git away with you," giggled mollie.
""i must hurry back "fore aunt emily jane gits wind i'm gone.
i hope there's good news in your girl's letter.
my, but did n't you look flat when aunt said she'd went!"
murray beamed at her idiotically.
when she had vanished among the trees he opened his letter.
""dear mr. murray," it ran, "your unblushing audacity of the morning deserves some punishment.
i hereby punish you by prompt departure from orchard knob.
yet i do not dislike audacity, at some times, in some places, in some people.
it is only from a sense of duty that i punish it in this case.
and it was really pleasant in eden.
if you do not mail that letter, and if you still persist in your very absurd interpretation of the meaning of eve's kiss, we may meet again in town.
until then i remain, "very sincerely yours, "dora lynne mannering."
murray kissed the grey letter and put it tenderly away in his pocket.
then he took his letter to his uncle and tore it into tiny fragments.
finally he looked at his watch.
""if i hurry, i can catch the afternoon train to town," he said.
aunt susanna's birthday celebration good afternoon, nora may.
i'm real glad to see you.
i've been watching you coming down the hill and i hoping you'd turn in at our gate.
going to visit with me this afternoon?
that's good.
i'm feeling so happy and delighted and i've been hankering for someone to tell it all to.
tell you about it?
well, i guess i might as well.
it ai n't any breach of confidence.
you did n't know anne douglas?
she taught school here three years ago, afore your folks moved over from talcott.
she belonged up montrose way and she was only eighteen when she came here to teach.
she boarded with us and her and me were the greatest chums.
she was just a sweet girl.
she was the prettiest teacher we ever had, and that's saying a good deal, for springdale has always been noted for getting good-looking schoolmarms, just as miller's road is noted for its humly ones.
anne had yards of brown wavy hair and big, dark blue eyes.
her face was kind o" pale, but when she smiled you would have to smile too, if you'd been chief mourner at your own funeral.
she was a well-spring of joy in the house, and we all loved her.
gilbert martin began to drive her the very first week she was here.
gilbert is my sister julia's son, and a fine young fellow he is.
it ai n't good manners to brag of your own relations, but i'm always forgetting and doing it.
gil was a great pet of mine.
he was so bright and nice-mannered everybody liked him.
him and anne were a fine-looking couple, nora may.
not but what they had their shortcomings.
anne's nose was a mite too long and gil had a crooked mouth.
besides, they was both pretty proud and sperrited and high-strung.
but they thought an awful lot of each other.
it made me feel young again to see'em.
anne was n't a mossel vain, but nights she expected gil she'd prink for hours afore her glass, fixing her hair this way and that, and trying on all her good clothes to see which become her most.
i used to love her for it.
and i used to love to see the way gil's face would light up when she came into a room or place where he was.
amanda perkins, she says to me once, "anne douglas and gil martin are most terrible struck on each other."
and she said it in a tone that indicated that it was a dreadful disgraceful and unbecoming state of affairs.
amanda had a disappointment once and it soured her.
i immediately responded, "yes, they are most terrible struck on each other," and i said it in a tone that indicated i thought it a most beautiful and lovely thing that they should be so.
and so it was.
you're rather too young to be thinking of such things, nora may, but you'll remember my words when the time comes.
another nephew of mine, james ebenezer lawson -- he calls himself james e. back there in town, and i do n't blame him, for i never could stand ebenezer for a name myself; but that's neither here nor there.
well, he said their love was idyllic, i ai n't very sure what that means.
i looked it up in the dictionary after james ebenezer left -- i would n't display my ignorance afore him -- but i ca n't say that i was much the wiser for it.
anyway, it meant something real nice; i was sure of that by the way james ebenezer spoke and the wistful look in his eyes.
james ebenezer is n't married; he was to have been, and she died a month afore the wedding day.
he was never the same man again.
well, to get back to gilbert and anne.
when anne's school year ended in june she resigned and went home to get ready to be married.
the wedding was to be in september, and i promised anne faithful i'd go over to montrose in august for two weeks and help her to get her quilts ready.
anne thought that nobody could quilt like me.
i was as tickled as a girl at the thought of visiting with anne for two weeks, but i never went; things happened before august.
i do n't know rightly how the trouble began.
other folks -- jealous folks -- made mischief.
anne was thirty miles away and gilbert could n't see her every day to keep matters clear and fair.
besides, as i've said, they were both proud and high-sperrited.
the upshot of it was they had a terrible quarrel and the engagement was broken.
when two people do n't care overly much for each other, nora may, a quarrel never amounts to much between them, and it's soon made up.
but when they love each other better than life it cuts so deep and hurts so much that nine times out of ten they wo n't ever forgive each other.
the more you love anybody, nora may, the more he can hurt you.
to be sure, you're too young to be thinking of such things.
it all came like a thunderclap on gil's friends here at greendale, because we had n't ever suspected things were going wrong.
the first thing we knew was that anne had gone up west to teach school again at st. mary's, eighty miles away, and gilbert, he went out to manitoba on a harvest excursion and stayed there.
it just about broke his parents" hearts.
he was their only child and they just worshipped him.
gil and anne both wrote to me off and on, but never a word, not so much as a name, did they say of each other.
i'd "a" writ and asked'em the rights of the fuss if i could, in hopes of patching it up, but i ca n't write now -- my hand is too shaky -- and mebbe it was just as well, for meddling is terribly risky work in a love trouble, nora may.
ninety-nine times out of a hundred the last state of a meddler and them she meddles with is worse than the first.
so i just set tight and said nothing, while everybody else in the clan was talking anne and gil sixty words to the minute.
well, last birthday morning i was feeling terrible disperrited.
i had made up my mind that my birthday was always to be a good thing for other people, and there did n't seem one blessed thing i could do to make anybody glad.
emma matilda and george and the children were all well and happy and wanted for nothing that i could give them.
i begun to be afraid i'd lived long enough, nora may.
when a woman gets to the point where she ca n't give a gift of joy to anyone, there ai n't much use in her living.
i felt real old and worn out and useless.
i was sitting here under these very trees -- they was just budding out in leaf then, as young and cheerful as if they was n't a hundred years old.
and i sighed right out loud and said, "oh, grandpa holland, it's time i was put away up on the hill there with you."
and with that the gate banged and there was nancy jane whitmore's boy, sam, with two letters for me.
one was from anne up at st. mary's and the other was from gil out in manitoba.
i read anne's first.
she just struck right into things in the first paragraph.
she said her year at st. mary's was nearly up, and when it was she meant to quit teaching and go away to new york and learn to be a trained nurse.
she said she was just broken-hearted about gilbert, and would always love him to the day of her death.
but she knew he did n't care anything more about her after the way he had acted, and there was nothing left for her in life but to do something for other people, and so on and so on, for twelve mortal pages.
anne is a fine writer, and i just cried like a babe over that letter, it was so touching, although i was enjoying myself hugely all the time, i was so delighted to find out that anne loved gilbert still.
i was getting skeered she did n't, her letters all winter had been so kind of jokey and frivolous, all about the good times she was having, and the parties she went to, and the new dresses she got.
new dresses!
when i read that letter of anne's, i knew that all the purple and fine linen in the world was just like so much sackcloth and ashes to her as long as gilbert was sulking out on a prairie farm.
well, i wiped my eyes and polished up my specs, but i might have spared myself the trouble, for in five minutes, nora may, there was i sobbing again; over gilbert's letter.
by the most curious coincidence he had opened his heart to me too.
being a man, he was n't so discursive as anne; he said his say in four pages, but i could read the heartache between the lines.
he wrote that he was going to klondike and would start in a month's time.
he was sick of living now that he'd lost anne.
he said he loved her better than his life and always would, and could never forget her, but he knew she did n't care anything about him now after the way she'd acted, and he wanted to get as far away from her and the torturing thought of her as he could.
so he was going to klondike -- going to klondike, nora may, when his mother was writing to him to come home every week and anne was breaking her heart for him at st. mary's.
well, i folded up them letters and, says i, "grandpa holland, i guess my birthday celebration is here ready to hand."
i thought real hard.
i could n't write myself to explain to those two people that they each thought the world of each other still -- my hands are too stiff; and i could n't get anyone else to write because i could n't let out what they'd told me in confidence.
so i did a mean, dishonourable thing, nora may.
i sent anne's letter to gilbert and gilbert's to anne.
i asked emma matilda to address them, and emma matilda did it and asked no questions.
i brought her up that way.
then i settled down to wait.
in less than a month gilbert's mother had a letter from him saying that he was coming home to settle down and marry anne.
he arrived home yesterday and last night anne came to springdale on her way home from st. mary's.
they came to see me this morning and said things to me i ai n't going to repeat because they would sound fearful vain.
they were so happy that they made me feel as if it was a good thing to have lived eighty years in a world where folks could be so happy.
they said their new joy was my birthday gift to them.
the wedding is to be in september and i'm going to montrose in august to help anne with her quilts.
i do n't think anything will happen to prevent this time -- no quarrelling, anyhow.
those two young creatures have learned their lesson.
you'd better take it to heart too, nora may.
it's less trouble to learn it at second hand.
do n't you ever quarrel with your real beau -- it do n't matter about the sham ones, of course.
do n't take offence at trifles or listen to what other people tell you about him -- outsiders, that is, that want to make mischief.
what you think about him is of more importance than what they do.
to be sure, you're too young yet to be thinking of such things at all.
but just mind what old aunt susanna told you when your time comes.
bertie's new year he stood on the sagging doorstep and looked out on the snowy world.
his hands were clasped behind him, and his thin face wore a thoughtful, puzzled look.
the door behind him opened jerkingly, and a scowling woman came out with a pan of dishwater in her hand.
""ai n't you gone yet, bert?"
she said sharply.
""what in the world are you hanging round for?"
""it's early yet," said bertie cheerfully.
""i thought maybe george fraser'd be along and i'd get a lift as far as the store."
""well, i never saw such laziness!
no wonder old sampson wo n't keep you longer than the holidays if you're no smarter than that.
goodness, if i do n't settle that boy!"
-- as the sound of fretful crying came from the kitchen behind her.
""what is wrong with william john?"
asked bertie.
""why, he wants to go out coasting with those robinson boys, but he ca n't.
he has n't got any mittens and he would catch his death of cold again."
her voice seemed to imply that william john had died of cold several times already.
bertie looked soberly down at his old, well-darned mittens.
it was very cold, and he would have a great many errands to run.
he shivered, and looked up at his aunt's hard face as she stood wiping her dish-pan with a grim frown which boded no good to the discontented william john.
then he suddenly pulled off his mittens and held them out.
""here -- he can have mine.
i'll get on without them well enough."
""nonsense!"
said mrs. ross, but less unkindly.
""the fingers would freeze off you.
do n't be a goose."
""it's all right," persisted bertie.
""i do n't need them -- much.
and william john does n't hardly ever get out."
he thrust them into her hand and ran quickly down the street, as though he feared that the keen air might make him change his mind in spite of himself.
he had to stop a great many times that day to breathe on his purple hands.
still, he did not regret having lent his mittens to william john -- poor, pale, sickly little william john, who had so few pleasures.
it was sunset when bertie laid an armful of parcels down on the steps of doctor forbes's handsome house.
his back was turned towards the big bay window at one side, and he was busy trying to warm his hands, so he did not see the two small faces looking at him through the frosty panes.
""just look at that poor little boy, amy," said the taller of the two.
""he is almost frozen, i believe.
why does n't caroline hurry and open the door?"
""there she goes now," said amy.
""edie, could n't we coax her to let him come in and get warm?
he looks so cold."
and she drew her sister out into the hall, where the housekeeper was taking bertie's parcels.
""caroline," whispered edith timidly, "please tell that poor little fellow to come in and get warm -- he looks very cold."
""he's used to the cold, i warrant you," said the housekeeper rather impatiently.
""it wo n't hurt him."
""but it is christmas week," said edith gravely, "and you know, caroline, when mamma was here she used to say that we ought to be particularly thoughtful of others who were not so happy or well-off as we were at this time."
perhaps edith's reference to her mother softened caroline, for she turned to bertie and said cordially enough, "come in, and warm yourself before you go.
it's a cold day."
bertie shyly followed her to the kitchen.
""sit up to the fire," said caroline, placing a chair for him, while edith and amy came round to the other side of the stove and watched him with friendly interest.
""what's your name?"
asked caroline.
""robert ross, ma'am."
""oh, you're mrs. ross's nephew then," said caroline, breaking eggs into her cake-bowl, and whisking them deftly round.
""and you're sampson's errand boy just now?
my goodness," as the boy spread his blue hands over the fire, "where are your mittens, child?
you're never out without mittens a day like this!"
""i lent them to william john -- he had n't any," faltered bertie.
he did not know but that the lady might consider it a grave crime to be mittenless.
""no mittens!"
exclaimed amy in dismay.
""why, i have three pairs.
and who is william john?"
""he is my cousin," said bertie.
""and he's awful sickly.
he wanted to go out to play, and he had n't any mittens, so i lent him mine.
i did n't miss them -- much."
""what kind of a christmas did you have?"
""we did n't have any."
""no christmas!"
said amy, quite overcome.
""oh, well, i suppose you are going to have a good time on new year's instead."
bertie shook his head.
""no'm, i guess not.
we never have it different from other times."
amy was silent from sheer amazement.
edith understood better, and she changed the subject.
""have you any brothers or sisters, bertie?"
""no'm," returned bertie cheerfully.
""i guess there's enough of us without that.
i must be going now.
i'm very much obliged to you."
edith slipped from the room as he spoke, and met him again at the door.
she held out a pair of warm-looking mittens.
""these are for william john," she said simply, "so that you can have your own.
they are a pair of mine which are too big for me.
i know papa will say it is all right.
goodbye, bertie."
""goodbye -- and thank you," stammered bertie, as the door closed.
then he hastened home to william john.
that evening doctor forbes noticed a peculiarly thoughtful look on edith's face as she sat gazing into the glowing coal fire after dinner.
he laid his hand on her dark curls inquiringly.
""what are you musing over?"
""there was a little boy here today," began edith.
""oh, such a dear little boy," broke in amy eagerly from the corner, where she was playing with her kitten.
""his name was bertie ross.
he brought up the parcels, and we asked him in to get warm.
he had no mittens, and his hands were almost frozen.
and, oh, papa, just think!
-- he said he never had any christmas or new year at all."
""poor little fellow!"
said the doctor.
""i've heard of him; a pretty hard time he has of it, i think."
""he was so pretty, papa.
and edie gave him her blue mittens for william john."
""the plot deepens.
who is william john?"
""oh, a cousin or something, did n't he say edie?
anyway, he is sick, and he wanted to go coasting, and bertie gave him his mittens.
and i suppose he never had any christmas either."
""there are plenty who have n't," said the doctor, taking up his paper with a sigh.
""well, girlies, you seem interested in this little fellow so, if you like, you may invite him and his cousin to take dinner with you on new year's night."
""oh, papa!"
said edith, her eyes shining like stars.
the doctor laughed.
""write him a nice little note of invitation -- you are the lady of the house, you know -- and i'll see that he gets it tomorrow."
and this was how it came to pass that bertie received the next day his first invitation to dine out.
he read the little note through three times in order fully to take in its contents, and then went around the rest of the day in deep abstraction as though he was trying to decide some very important question.
it was with the same expression that he opened the door at home in the evening.
his aunt was stirring some oatmeal mush on the stove.
""is that you, bert?"
she spoke sharply.
she always spoke sharply, even when not intending it; it had grown to be a habit.
""yes'm," said bertie meekly, as he hung up his cap.
""i s "pose you've only got one day more at the store," said mrs. ross.
""sampson did n't say anything about keeping you longer, did he?"
""no.
he said he could n't -- i asked him."
""well, i did n't expect he would.
you'll have a holiday on new year's anyhow; whether you'll have anything to eat or not is a different question."
""i've an invitation to dinner," said bertie timidly, "me and william john.
it's from doctor forbes's little girls -- the ones that gave me the mittens."
he handed her the little note, and mrs. ross stooped down and read it by the fitful gleam of light which came from the cracked stove.
""well, you can please yourself," she said as she handed it back, "but william john could n't go if he had ten invitations.
he caught cold coasting yesterday.
i told him he would, but he was bound to go, and now he's laid up for a week.
listen to him barking in the bedroom there."
""well, then, i wo n't go either," said bertie with a sigh, it might be of relief, or it might be of disappointment.
""i would n't go there all alone."
""you're a goose!"
said his aunt.
""they would n't eat you.
but as i said, please yourself.
anyhow, hold your tongue about it to william john, or you'll have him crying and bawling to go too."
the caution came too late.
william john had already heard it, and when his mother went in to rub his chest with liniment, she found him with the ragged quilt over his head crying.
""come, william john, i want to rub you."
""i do n't want to be rubbed -- g "way," sobbed william john.
""i heard you out there -- you need n't think i did n't.
bertie's going to doctor forbes's to dinner and i ca n't go."
""well, you've only yourself to thank for it," returned his mother.
""if you had n't persisted in going out coasting yesterday when i wanted you to stay in, you'd have been able to go to doctor forbes's.
little boys who wo n't do as they're told always get into trouble.
stop crying, now.
i dare say if bertie goes they'll send you some candy, or something."
but william john refused to be comforted.
he cried himself to sleep that night, and when bertie went in to see him next morning, he found him sitting up in bed with his eyes red and swollen and the faded quilt drawn up around his pinched face.
""well, william john, how are you?"
""i ai n't any better," replied william john mournfully.
""i s "pose you'll have a great time tomorrow night, bertie?"
""oh, i'm not going since you ca n't," said bertie cheerily.
he thought this would comfort william john, but it had exactly the opposite effect.
william john had cried until he could cry no more, but he turned around and sobbed.
""there now!"
he said in tearless despair.
""that's just what i expected.
i did s "pose if i could n't go you would, and tell me about it.
you're mean as mean can be."
""come now, william john, do n't be so cross.
i thought you'd rather have me home, but i'll go, if you want me to."
""honest, now?"
""yes, honest.
i'll go anywhere to please you.
i must be off to the store now.
goodbye."
thus committed, bertie took his courage in both hands and went.
the next evening at dusk found him standing at doctor forbes's door with a very violently beating heart.
he was carefully dressed in his well-worn best suit and a neat white collar.
the frosty air had crimsoned his cheeks and his hair was curling round his face.
caroline opened the door and showed him into the parlour, where edith and amy were eagerly awaiting him.
""happy new year, bertie," cried amy.
""and -- but, why, where is william john?"
""he could n't come," answered bertie anxiously -- he was afraid he might not be welcome without william john.
""he's real sick.
he caught cold and has to stay in bed; but he wanted to come awful bad."
""oh, dear me!
poor william john!"
said amy in a disappointed tone.
but all further remarks were cut short by the entrance of doctor forbes.
""how do you do?"
he said, giving bertie's hand a hearty shake.
""but where is the other little fellow my girls were expecting?"
bertie patiently reaccounted for william john's non-appearance.
""it's a bad time for colds," said the doctor, sitting down and attacking the fire.
""i dare say, though, you have to run so fast these days that a cold could n't catch you.
i suppose you'll soon be leaving sampson's.
he told me he did n't need you after the holiday season was over.
what are you going at next?
have you anything in view?"
bertie shook his head sorrowfully.
""no, sir; but," he added more cheerfully, "i guess i'll find something if i hunt around lively.
i almost always do."
he forgot his shyness; his face flushed hopefully, and he looked straight at the doctor with his bright, earnest eyes.
the doctor poked the fire energetically and looked very wise.
but just then the girls came up and carried bertie off to display their holiday gifts.
and there was a fur cap and a pair of mittens for him!
he wondered whether he was dreaming.
""and here's a picture-book for william john," said amy, "and there is a sled out in the kitchen for him.
oh, there's the dinner-bell.
i'm awfully hungry.
papa says that is my "normal condition," but i do n't know what that means."
as for that dinner -- bertie might sometimes have seen such a repast in delightful dreams, but certainly never out of them.
it was a feast to be dated from.
when the plum pudding came on, the doctor, who had been notably silent, leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together, and looked critically at bertie.
""so mr. sampson ca n't keep you?"
bertie's face sobered at once.
he had almost forgotten his responsibilities.
""no, sir.
he says i'm too small for the heavy work."
""well, you are rather small -- but no doubt you will grow.
boys have a queer habit of doing that.
i think you know how to make yourself useful.
i need a boy here to run errands and look after my horse.
if you like, i'll try you.
you can live here, and go to school.
i sometimes hear of places for boys in my rounds, and the first good one that will suit you, i'll bespeak for you.
how will that do?"
""oh, sir, you are too good," said bertie with a choke in his voice.
""well, that is settled," said the doctor genially.
""come on monday then.
and perhaps we can do something for that other little chap, william, or john, or whatever his name is.
will you have some more pudding, bertie?"
""no, thank you," said bertie.
pudding, indeed!
he could not have eaten another mouthful after such wonderful and unexpected good fortune.
after dinner they played games, and cracked nuts, and roasted apples, until the clock struck nine; then bertie got up to go.
""off, are you?"
said the doctor, looking up from his paper.
""well, i'll expect you on monday, remember."
""yes, sir," said bertie happily.
he was not likely to forget.
as he went out amy came through the hall with a red sled.
""here is william john's present.
i've tied all the other things on so that they ca n't fall off."
edith was at the door-with a parcel.
""here are some nuts and candies for william john," she said.
""and tell him we all wish him a "happy new year.""
""thank you," said bertie.
""i've had a splendid time.
i'll tell william john.
goodnight."
he stepped out.
it was frostier than ever.
the snow crackled and snapped, the stars were keen and bright, but to bertie, running down the street with william john's sled thumping merrily behind him, the world was aglow with rosy hope and promise.
he was quite sure he could never forget this wonderful new year.
between the hill and the valley it was one of the moist, pleasantly odorous nights of early spring.
there was a chill in the evening air, but the grass was growing green in sheltered spots, and jeffrey miller had found purple-petalled violets and pink arbutus on the hill that day.
across a valley filled with beech and fir, there was a sunset afterglow, creamy yellow and pale red, with a new moon swung above it.
it was a night for a man to walk alone and dream of his love, which was perhaps why jeffrey miller came so loiteringly across the springy hill pasture, with his hands full of the mayflowers.
he was a tall, broad-shouldered man of forty, and looking no younger, with dark grey eyes and a tanned, clean-cut face, clean-shaven save for a drooping moustache.
jeffrey miller was considered a handsome man, and bayside people had periodical fits of wondering why he had never married.
they pitied him for the lonely life he must lead alone there at the valley farm, with only a deaf old housekeeper as a companion, for it did not occur to the bayside people in general that a couple of shaggy dogs could be called companions, and they did not know that books make very excellent comrades for people who know how to treat them.
one of jeffrey's dogs was with him now -- the oldest one, with white breast and paws and a tawny coat.
he was so old that he was half-blind and rather deaf, but, with one exception, he was the dearest of living creatures to jeffrey miller, for sara stuart had given him the sprawly, chubby little pup years ago.
they came down the hill together.
a group of men were standing on the bridge in the hollow, discussing colonel stuart's funeral of the day before.
jeffrey caught sara's name and paused on the outskirts of the group to listen.
sometimes he thought that if he were lying dead under six feet of turf and sara stuart's name were pronounced above him, his heart would give a bound of life.
""yes, the old kunnel's gone at last," christopher jackson was saying.
""he took his time dyin", that's sartain.
must be a kind of relief for sara -- she's had to wait on him, hand and foot, for years.
but no doubt she'll feel pretty lonesome.
wonder what she'll do?"
""is there any particular reason for her to do anything?"
asked alec churchill.
""well, she'll have to leave pinehurst.
the estate's entailed and goes to her cousin, charles stuart."
there were exclamations of surprise from the other men on hearing this.
jeffrey drew nearer, absently patting his dog's head.
he had not known it either.
""oh, yes," said christopher, enjoying all the importance of exclusive information.
""i thought everybody knew that.
pinehurst goes to the oldest male heir.
the old kunnel felt it keen that he had n't a son.
of course, there's plenty of money and sara'll get that.
but i guess she'll feel pretty bad at leaving her old home.
sara ai n't as young as she used to be, neither.
let me see -- she must be thirty-eight.
well, she's left pretty lonesome."
""maybe she'll stay on at pinehurst," said job crowe.
""it'd only be right for her cousin to give her a home there."
christopher shook his head.
""no, i understand they're not on very good terms.
sara do n't like charles stuart or his wife -- and i do n't blame her.
she wo n't stay there, not likely.
probably she'll go and live in town.
strange she never married.
she was reckoned handsome, and had plenty of beaus at one time."
jeffrey swung out of the group and started homeward with his dog.
to stand by and hear sara stuart discussed after this fashion was more than he could endure.
the men idly watched his tall, erect figure as he went along the valley.
""queer chap, jeff," said alec churchill reflectively.
""jeff's all right," said christopher in a patronizing way.
""there ai n't a better man or neighbour alive.
i've lived next farm to him for thirty years, so i ought to know.
but he's queer sartainly -- not like other people -- kind of unsociable.
he do n't care for a thing "cept dogs and reading and mooning round woods and fields.
that ai n't natural, you know.
but i must say he's a good farmer.
he's got the best farm in bayside, and that's a real nice house he put up on it.
ai n't it an odd thing he never married?
never seemed to have no notion of it.
i ca n't recollect of jeff miller's ever courting anybody.
that's another unnatural thing about him."
""i've always thought that jeff thought himself a cut or two above the rest of us," said tom scovel with a sneer.
""maybe he thinks the bayside girls ai n't good enough for him."
""there ai n't no such dirty pride about jeff," pronounced christopher conclusively.
""and the millers are the best family hereabouts, leaving the kunnel's out.
and jeff's well off -- nobody knows how well, i reckon, but i can guess, being his land neighbour.
jeff ai n't no fool nor loafer, if he is a bit queer."
meanwhile, the object of these remarks was striding homeward and thinking, not of the men behind him, but of sara stuart.
he must go to her at once.
he had not intruded on her since her father's death, thinking her sorrow too great for him to meddle with.
but this was different.
perhaps she needed the advice or assistance only he could give.
to whom else in bayside could she turn for it but to him, her old friend?
was it possible that she must leave pinehurst?
the thought struck cold dismay to his soul.
how could he bear his life if she went away?
he had loved sara stuart from childhood.
he remembered vividly the day he had first seen her -- a spring day, much like this one had been; he, a boy of eight, had gone with his father to the big, sunshiny hill field and he had searched for birds" nests in the little fir copses along the crest while his father plowed.
he had so come upon her, sitting on the fence under the pines at the back of pinehurst -- a child of six in a dress of purple cloth.
her long, light brown curls fell over her shoulders and rippled sleekly back from her calm little brow; her eyes were large and greyish blue, straight-gazing and steadfast.
to the end of his life the boy was to carry in his heart the picture she made there under the pines.
""little boy," she had said, with a friendly smile, "will you show me where the mayflowers grow?"
shyly enough he had assented, and they set out together for the barrens beyond the field, where the arbutus trailed its stars of sweetness under the dusty dead grasses and withered leaves of the old year.
the boy was thrilled with delight.
she was a fairy queen who thus graciously smiled on him and chattered blithely as they searched for mayflowers in the fresh spring sunshine.
he thought it a wonderful thing that it had so chanced.
it overjoyed him to give the choicest dusters he found into her slim, waxen little fingers, and watch her eyes grow round with pleasure in them.
when the sun began to lower over the beeches she had gone home with her arms full of arbutus, but she had turned at the edge of the pineland and waved her hand at him.
that night, when he told his mother of the little girl he had met on the hill, she had hoped anxiously that he had been "very polite," for the little girl was a daughter of colonel stuart, newly come to pinehurst.
jeffrey, reflecting, had not been certain that he had been polite; "but i am sure she liked me," he said gravely.
a few days later a message came from mrs. stuart on the hill to mrs. miller in the valley.
would she let her little boy go up now and then to play with sara?
sara was very lonely because she had no playmates.
so jeff, overjoyed, had gone to his divinity's very home, where the two children played together many a day.
all through their childhood they had been fast friends.
sara's parents placed no bar to their intimacy.
they had soon concluded that little jeff miller was a very good playmate for sara.
he was gentle, well-behaved, and manly.
sara never went to the district school which jeff attended; she had her governess at home.
with no other boy or girl in bayside did she form any friendship, but her loyalty to jeff never wavered.
as for jeff, he worshipped her and would have done anything she commanded.
he belonged to her from the day they had hunted arbutus on the hill.
when sara was fifteen she had gone away to school.
jeff had missed her sorely.
for four years he saw her only in the summers, and each year she had seemed taller, statelier, further from him.
when she graduated her father took her abroad for two years; then she came home, a lovely, high-bred girl, dimpling on the threshold of womanhood; and jeffrey miller was face to face with two bitter facts.
one was that he loved her -- not with the boy-and-girl love of long ago, but with the love of a man for the one woman in the world; and the other was that she was as far beyond his reach as one of those sunset stars of which she had always reminded him in her pure, clear-shining loveliness.
he looked these facts unflinchingly in the face until he had grown used to them, and then he laid down his course for himself.
he loved sara -- and he did not wish to conquer his love, even if it had been possible.
it were better to love her, whom he could never win, than to love and be loved by any other woman.
his great office in life was to be her friend, humble and unexpectant; to be at hand if she should need him for ever so trifling a service; never to presume, always to be faithful.
sara had not forgotten her old friend.
but their former comradeship was now impossible; they could be friends, but never again companions.
sara's life was full and gay; she had interests in which he had no share; her social world was utterly apart from his; she was of the hill and its traditions, he was of the valley and its people.
the democracy of childhood past, there was no common ground on which they might meet.
only one thing jeffrey had found it impossible to contemplate calmly.
some day sara would marry -- a man who was her equal, who sat at her father's table as a guest.
in spite of himself, jeffrey's heart filled with hot rebellion at the thought; it was like a desecration and a robbery.
but, as the years went by, this thing he dreaded did not happen.
sara did not marry, although gossip assigned her many suitors not unworthy of her.
she and jeffrey were always friends, although they met but seldom.
sometimes she sent him a book; it was his custom to search for the earliest mayflowers and take them to her; once in a long while they met and talked of many things.
jeffrey's calendar from year to year was red-lettered by these small happenings, of which nobody knew, or, knowing, would have cared.
so he and sara drifted out of youth, together yet apart.
her mother had died, and sara was the gracious, stately mistress of pinehurst, which grew quieter as the time went on; the lovers ceased to come, and holiday friends grew few; with the old colonel's failing health the gaieties and lavish entertaining ceased.
jeffrey thought that sara must often be lonely, but she never said so; she remained sweet, serene, calm-eyed, like the child he had met on the hill.
only, now and then, jeffrey fancied he saw a shadow on her face -- a shadow so faint and fleeting that only the eye of an unselfish, abiding love, made clear-sighted by patient years, could have seen it.
it hurt him, that shadow; he would have given anything in his power to have banished it.
and now this long friendship was to be broken.
sara was going away.
at first he had thought only of her pain, but now his own filled his heart.
how could he live without her?
how could he dwell in the valley knowing that she had gone from the hill?
never to see her light shine down on him through the northern gap in the pines at night!
never to feel that perhaps her eyes rested on him now and then as he went about his work in the valley fields!
never to stoop with a glad thrill over the first spring flowers because it was his privilege to take them to her!
jeffrey groaned aloud.
no, he could not go up to see her that night; he must wait -- he must strengthen himself.
then his heart rebuked him.
this was selfishness; this was putting his own feelings before hers -- a thing he had sworn never to do.
perhaps she needed him -- perhaps she had wondered why he had not come to offer her such poor service as might be in his power.
he turned and went down through the orchard lane, taking the old field-path across the valley and up the hill, which he had traversed so often and so joyfully in boyhood.
it was dark now, and a few stars were shining in the silvery sky.
the wind sighed among the pines as he walked under them.
sometimes he felt that he must turn back -- that his pain was going to master him; then he forced himself to go on.
the old grey house where sara lived seemed bleak and stricken in the dull light, with its leafless vines clinging to it.
there were no lights in it.
it looked like a home left soulless.
jeffrey went around to the garden door and knocked.
he had expected the maid to open it, put sara herself came.
""why, jeff," she said, with pleasure in her tones.
""i am so glad to see you.
i have been wondering why you had not come before."
""i did not think you would want to see me yet," he said hurriedly.
""i have thought about you every hour -- but i feared to intrude.""
you could n't intrude," she said gently.
""yes, i have wanted to see you, jeff.
come into the library."
he followed her into the room where they had always sat in his rare calls.
sara lighted the lamp on the table.
as the light shot up she stood clearly revealed in it -- a tall, slender woman in a trailing gown of grey.
even a stranger, not knowing her age, would have guessed it to be what it was, yet it would have been hard to say what gave the impression of maturity.
her face was quite unlined -- a little pale, perhaps, with more finely cut outlines than those of youth.
her eyes were clear and bright; her abundant brown hair waved back from her face in the same curves that jeffrey had noted in the purple-gowned child of six, under the pines.
perhaps it was the fine patience and serenity in her face that told her tale of years.
youth can never acquire it.
her eyes brightened when she saw the mayflowers he carried.
she came and took them from him, and her hands touched his, sending a little thrill of joy through him.
""how lovely they are!
and the first i have seen this spring.
you always bring me the first, do n't you, jeff?
do you remember the first day we spent picking mayflowers together?"
jeff smiled.
could he forget?
but something held him back from speech.
sara put the flowers in a vase on the table, but slipped one starry pink cluster into the lace on her breast.
she came and sat down beside jeffrey; he saw that her beautiful eyes had been weeping, and that there were lines of pain around her lips.
some impulse that would not be denied made him lean over and take her hand.
she left it unresistingly in his clasp.
""i am very lonely now, jeff," she said sadly.
""father has gone.
i have no friends left."
""you have me," said jeffrey quietly.
""yes.
i should n't have said that.
you are my friend, i know, jeff.
but, but -- i must leave pinehurst, you know."
""i learned that tonight for the first time," he answered.
""did you ever come to a place where everything seemed ended -- where it seemed that there was nothing -- simply nothing -- left, jeff?"
she said wistfully.
""but, no, it could n't seem so to a man.
only a woman could fully understand what i mean.
that is how i feel now.
while i had father to live for it was n't so hard.
but now there is nothing.
and i must go away."
""is there anything i can do?"
muttered jeffrey miserably.
he knew now that he had made a mistake in coming tonight; he could not help her.
his own pain had unmanned him.
presently he would say something foolish or selfish in spite of himself.
sara turned her eyes on him.
""there is nothing anybody can do, jeff," she said piteously.
her eyes, those clear child-eyes, filled with tears.
""i shall be braver -- stronger -- after a while.
but just now i have no strength left.
i feel like a lost, helpless child.
oh, jeff!"
she put her slender hands over her face and sobbed.
every sob cut jeffrey to the heart.
""do n't -- do n't, sara," he said huskily.
""i ca n't bear to see you suffer so.
i'd die for you if it would do you any good.
i love you -- i love you!
i never meant to tell you so, but it is the truth.
i ought n't to tell you now.
do n't think that i'm trying to take any advantage of your loneliness and sorrow.
i know -- i have always known -- that you are far above me.
but that could n't prevent my loving you -- just humbly loving you, asking nothing else.
you may be angry with my presumption, but i ca n't help telling you that i love you.
that's all.
i just want you to know it."
sara had turned away her head.
jeffrey was overcome with contrition.
ah, he had no business to speak so -- he had spoiled the devotion of years.
who was he that he should have dared to love her?
silence alone had justified his love, and now he had lost that justification.
she would despise him.
he had forfeited her friendship for ever.
""are you angry, sara?"
he questioned sadly, after a silence.
""i think i am," said sara.
she kept her stately head averted.
""if -- if you have loved me, jeff, why did you never tell me so before?"
""how could i dare?"
he said gravely.
""i knew i could never win you -- that i had no right to dream of you so.
oh, sara, do n't be angry!
my love has been reverent and humble.
i have asked nothing.
i ask nothing now but your friendship.
do n't take that from me, sara.
do n't be angry with me."
""i am angry," repeated sara, "and i think i have a right to be."
""perhaps so," he said simply, "but not because i have loved you.
such love as mine ought to anger no woman, sara.
but you have a right to be angry with me for presuming to put it into words.
i should not have done so -- but i could not help it.
it rushed to my lips in spite of me.
forgive me."
""i do n't know whether i can forgive you for not telling me before," said sara steadily."
that is what i have to forgive -- not your speaking at last, even if it was dragged from you against your will.
did you think i would make you such a very poor wife, jeff, that you would not ask me to marry you?"
""sara!"
he said, aghast.
""i -- i -- you were as far above me as a star in the sky -- i never dreamed -- i never hoped --" "that i could care for you?"
said sara, looking round at last.
""then you were more modest than a man ought to be, jeff.
i did not know that you loved me, or i should have found some way to make you speak out long ago.
i should not have let you waste all these years.
i've loved you -- ever since we picked mayflowers on the hill, i think -- ever since i came home from school, i know.
i never cared for anyone else -- although i tried to, when i thought you did n't care for me.
it mattered nothing to me that the world may have thought there was some social difference between us.
there, jeff, you can not accuse me of not making my meaning plain."
""sara," he whispered, wondering, bewildered, half-afraid to believe this unbelievable joy.
""i'm not half worthy of you -- but -- but" -- he bent forward and put his arm around her, looking straight into her clear, unshrinking eyes.
""sara, will you be my wife?"
""yes."
she said the word clearly and truly.
""and i will think myself a proud and happy and honoured woman to be so, jeff.
oh, i do n't shrink from telling you the truth, you see.
you mean too much to me for me to dissemble it.
i've hidden it for eighteen years because i did n't think you wanted to hear it, but i'll give myself the delight of saying it frankly now."
she lifted her delicate, high-bred face, fearless love shining in every lineament, to his, and they exchanged their first kiss.
clorinda's gifts "it is a dreadful thing to be poor a fortnight before christmas," said clorinda, with the mournful sigh of seventeen years.
aunt emmy smiled.
aunt emmy was sixty, and spent the hours she did n't spend in a bed, on a sofa or in a wheel chair; but aunt emmy was never heard to sigh.
""i suppose it is worse then than at any other time," she admitted.
that was one of the nice things about aunt emmy.
she always sympathized and understood.
""i'm worse than poor this christmas... i'm stony broke," said clorinda dolefully.
""my spell of fever in the summer and the consequent doctor's bills have cleaned out my coffers completely.
not a single christmas present can i give.
and i did so want to give some little thing to each of my dearest people.
but i simply ca n't afford it... that's the hateful, ugly truth."
clorinda sighed again.
""the gifts which money can purchase are not the only ones we can give," said aunt emmy gently, "nor the best, either."
""oh, i know it's nicer to give something of your own work," agreed clorinda, "but materials for fancy work cost too.
that kind of gift is just as much out of the question for me as any other."
""that was not what i meant," said aunt emmy.
""what did you mean, then?"
asked clorinda, looking puzzled.
aunt emmy smiled.
""suppose you think out my meaning for yourself," she said.
""that would be better than if i explained it.
besides, i do n't think i could explain it.
take the beautiful line of a beautiful poem to help you in your thinking out: "the gift without the giver is bare.""
""i'd put it the other way and say, "the giver without the gift is bare,"" said clorinda, with a grimace.
""that is my predicament exactly.
well, i hope by next christmas i'll not be quite bankrupt.
i'm going into mr. callender's store down at murraybridge in february.
he has offered me the place, you know."
""wo n't your aunt miss you terribly?"
said aunt emmy gravely.
clorinda flushed.
there was a note in aunt emmy's voice that disturbed her.
""oh, yes, i suppose she will," she answered hurriedly.
""but she'll get used to it very soon.
and i will be home every saturday night, you know.
i'm dreadfully tired of being poor, aunt emmy, and now that i have a chance to earn something for myself i mean to take it.
i can help aunt mary, too.
i'm to get four dollars a week."
""i think she would rather have your companionship than a part of your salary, clorinda," said aunt emmy.
""but of course you must decide for yourself, dear.
it is hard to be poor.
i know it.
i am poor."
""you poor!"
said clorinda, kissing her.
""why, you are the richest woman i know, aunt emmy -- rich in love and goodness and contentment."
""and so are you, dearie... rich in youth and health and happiness and ambition.
are n't they all worth while?"
""of course they are," laughed clorinda.
""only, unfortunately, christmas gifts ca n't be coined out of them."
""did you ever try?"
asked aunt emmy.
""think out that question, too, in your thinking out, clorinda."
""well, i must say bye-bye and run home.
i feel cheered up -- you always cheer people up, aunt emmy.
how grey it is outdoors.
i do hope we'll have snow soon.
would n't it be jolly to have a white christmas?
we always have such faded brown decembers."
clorinda lived just across the road from aunt emmy in a tiny white house behind some huge willows.
but aunt mary lived there too -- the only relative clorinda had, for aunt emmy was n't really her aunt at all.
clorinda had always lived with aunt mary ever since she could remember.
clorinda went home and upstairs to her little room under the eaves, where the great bare willow boughs were branching athwart her windows.
she was thinking over what aunt emmy had said about christmas gifts and giving.
""i'm sure i do n't know what she could have meant," pondered clorinda.
""i do wish i could find out if it would help me any.
i'd love to remember a few of my friends at least.
there's miss mitchell... she's been so good to me all this year and helped me so much with my studies.
and there's mrs. martin out in manitoba.
if i could only send her something!
she must be so lonely out there.
and aunt emmy herself, of course; and poor old aunt kitty down the lane; and aunt mary and, yes -- florence too, although she did treat me so meanly.
i shall never feel the same to her again.
but she gave me a present last christmas, and so out of mere politeness i ought to give her something."
clorinda stopped short suddenly.
she had just remembered that she would not have liked to say that last sentence to aunt emmy.
therefore, there was something wrong about it.
clorinda had long ago learned that there was sure to be something wrong in anything that could not be said to aunt emmy.
so she stopped to think it over.
clorinda puzzled over aunt emmy's meaning for four days and part of three nights.
then all at once it came to her.
or if it was n't aunt emmy's meaning it was a very good meaning in itself, and it grew clearer and expanded in meaning during the days that followed, although at first clorinda shrank a little from some of the conclusions to which it led her.
""i've solved the problem of my christmas giving for this year," she told aunt emmy.
""i have some things to give after all.
some of them quite costly, too; that is, they will cost me something, but i know i'll be better off and richer after i've paid the price.
that is what mr. grierson would call a paradox, is n't it?
i'll explain all about it to you on christmas day."
on christmas day, clorinda went over to aunt emmy's.
it was a faded brown christmas after all, for the snow had not come.
but clorinda did not mind; there was such joy in her heart that she thought it the most delightful christmas day that ever dawned.
she put the queer cornery armful she carried down on the kitchen floor before she went into the sitting room.
aunt emmy was lying on the sofa before the fire, and clorinda sat down beside her.
""i've come to tell you all about it," she said.
aunt emmy patted the hand that was in her own.
""from your face, dear girl, it will be pleasant hearing and telling," she said.
clorinda nodded.
""aunt emmy, i thought for days over your meaning... thought until i was dizzy.
and then one evening it just came to me, without any thinking at all, and i knew that i could give some gifts after all.
i thought of something new every day for a week.
at first i did n't think i could give some of them, and then i thought how selfish i was.
i would have been willing to pay any amount of money for gifts if i had had it, but i was n't willing to pay what i had.
i got over that, though, aunt emmy.
now i'm going to tell you what i did give.
""first, there was my teacher, miss mitchell.
i gave her one of father's books.
i have so many of his, you know, so that i would n't miss one; but still it was one i loved very much, and so i felt that that love made it worth while.
that is, i felt that on second thought.
at first, aunt emmy, i thought i would be ashamed to offer miss mitchell a shabby old book, worn with much reading and all marked over with father's notes and pencillings.
i was afraid she would think it queer of me to give her such a present.
and yet somehow it seemed to me that it was better than something brand new and unmellowed -- that old book which father had loved and which i loved.
so i gave it to her, and she understood.
i think it pleased her so much, the real meaning in it.
she said it was like being given something out of another's heart and life.
""then you know mrs. martin... last year she was miss hope, my dear sunday school teacher.
she married a home missionary, and they are in a lonely part of the west.
well, i wrote her a letter.
not just an ordinary letter; dear me, no.
i took a whole day to write it, and you should have seen the postmistress's eyes stick out when i mailed it.
i just told her everything that had happened in greenvale since she went away.
i made it as newsy and cheerful and loving as i possibly could.
everything bright and funny i could think of went into it.
""the next was old aunt kitty.
you know she was my nurse when i was a baby, and she's very fond of me.
but, well, you know, aunt emmy, i'm ashamed to confess it, but really i've never found aunt kitty very entertaining, to put it mildly.
she is always glad when i go to see her, but i've never gone except when i could n't help it.
she is very deaf, and rather dull and stupid, you know.
well, i gave her a whole day.
i took my knitting yesterday, and sat with her the whole time and just talked and talked.
i told her all the greenvale news and gossip and everything else i thought she'd like to hear.
she was so pleased and proud; she told me when i came away that she had n't had such a nice time for years.
""then there was... florence.
you know, aunt emmy, we were always intimate friends until last year.
then florence once told rose watson something i had told her in confidence.
i found it out and i was so hurt.
i could n't forgive florence, and i told her plainly i could never be a real friend to her again.
florence felt badly, because she really did love me, and she asked me to forgive her, but it seemed as if i could n't.
well, aunt emmy, that was my christmas gift to her... my forgiveness.
i went down last night and just put my arms around her and told her that i loved her as much as ever and wanted to be real close friends again.
""i gave aunt mary her gift this morning.
i told her i was n't going to murraybridge, that i just meant to stay home with her.
she was so glad -- and i'm glad, too, now that i've decided so."
""your gifts have been real gifts, clorinda," said aunt emmy.
""something of you -- the best of you -- went into each of them."
clorinda went out and brought her cornery armful in.
""i did n't forget you, aunt emmy," she said, as she unpinned the paper.
there was a rosebush -- clorinda's own pet rosebush -- all snowed over with fragrant blossoms.
aunt emmy loved flowers.
she put her finger under one of the roses and kissed it.
""it's as sweet as yourself, dear child," she said tenderly.
""and it will be a joy to me all through the lonely winter days.
you've found out the best meaning of christmas giving, have n't you, dear?"
""yes, thanks to you, aunt emmy," said clorinda softly.
cyrilla's inspiration it was a rainy saturday afternoon and all the boarders at mrs. plunkett's were feeling dull and stupid, especially the normal school girls on the third floor, cyrilla blair and carol hart and mary newton, who were known as the trio, and shared the big front room together.
they were sitting in that front room, scowling out at the weather.
at least, carol and mary were scowling.
cyrilla never scowled; she was sitting curled up on her bed with her greek grammar, and she smiled at the rain and her grumbling chums as cheerfully as possible.
""for pity's sake, cyrilla, put that grammar away," moaned mary.
""there is something positively uncanny about a girl who can study greek on saturday afternoons -- at least, this early in the term."
""i'm not really studying," said cyrilla, tossing the book away.
""i'm only pretending to.
i'm really just as bored and lonesome as you are.
but what else is there to do?
we ca n't stir outside the door; we've nothing to read; we ca n't make candy since mrs. plunkett has forbidden us to use the oil stove in our room; we'll probably quarrel all round if we sit here in idleness; so i've been trying to brush up my greek verbs by way of keeping out of mischief.
have you any better employment to offer me?"
""if it were only a mild drizzle we might go around and see the patterson girls," sighed carol.
""but there is no venturing out in such a downpour.
cyrilla, you are supposed to be the brainiest one of us.
prove your claim to such pre-eminence by thinking of some brand-new amusement, especially suited to rainy afternoons.
that will be putting your grey matter to better use than squandering it on greek verbs out of study limits."
""if only i'd got a letter from home today," said mary, who seemed determined to persist in gloom.
""i would n't mind the weather.
letters are such cheery things: -- especially the letters my sister writes.
they're so full of fun and nice little news.
the reading of one cheers me up for the day.
cyrilla blair, what is the matter?
you nearly frightened me to death!"
cyrilla had bounded from her bed to the centre of the floor, waving her greek grammar wildly in the air.
""girls, i have an inspiration!"
she exclaimed.
""good!
let's hear it," said carol.
""let's write letters -- rainy-day letters -- to everyone in the house," said cyrilla.
""you may depend all the rest of the folks under mrs. plunkett's hospitable roof are feeling more or less blue and lonely too, as well as ourselves.
let's write them the jolliest, nicest letters we can compose and get nora jane to take them to their rooms.
there's that pale little sewing girl, i do n't believe she ever gets letters from anybody, and miss marshall, i'm sure she does n't, and poor old mrs. johnson, whose only son died last month, and the new music teacher who came yesterday, a letter of welcome to her -- and old mr. grant, yes, and mrs. plunkett too, thanking her for all her kindness to us.
you knew she has been awfully nice to us in spite of the oil stove ukase.
that's six -- two apiece.
let's do it, girls."
cyrilla's sudden enthusiasm for her plan infected the others.
""it's a nice idea," said mary, brightening up.
""but who's to write to whom?
i'm willing to take anybody but miss marshall.
i could n't write a line to her to save my life.
she'd be horrified at anything funny or jokey and our letters will have to be mainly nonsense -- nonsense of the best brand, to be sure, but still nonsense."
""better leave miss marshall out," suggested carol.
""you know she disapproves of us anyhow.
she'd probably resent a letter of the sort, thinking we were trying to play some kind of joke on her."
""it would never do to leave her out," said cyrilla decisively.
""of course, she's a bit queer and unamiable, but, girls, think of thirty years of boarding-house life, even with the best of plunketts.
would n't that sour anybody?
you know it would.
you'd be cranky and grumbly and disagreeable too, i dare say.
i'm really sorry for miss marshall.
she's had a very hard life.
mrs. plunkett told me all about her one day.
i do n't think we should mind her biting little speeches and sharp looks.
and anyway, even if she is really as disagreeable as she sometimes seems to be, why, it must make it all the harder for her, do n't you think?
so she needs a letter most of all.
i'll write to her, since it's my suggestion.
we'll draw lots for the others."
besides miss marshall, the new music teacher fell to cyrilla's share.
mary drew mrs. plunkett and the dressmaker, and carol drew mrs. johnson and old mr. grant.
for the next two hours the girls wrote busily, forgetting all about the rainy day, and enjoying their epistolary labours to the full.
it was dusk when all the letters were finished.
""why, has n't the afternoon gone quickly after all!"
exclaimed carol.
""i just let my pen run on and jotted down any good working idea that came into my head.
cyrilla blair, that big fat letter is never for miss marshall!
what on earth did you find to write her?"
""it was n't so hard when i got fairly started," said cyrilla, smiling.
""now, let's hunt up nora jane and send the letters around so that everybody can read his or hers before tea-time.
we should have a choice assortment of smiles at the table instead of all those frowns and sighs we had at dinner."
miss emily marshall was at that moment sitting in her little back room, all alone in the dusk, with the rain splashing drearily against the windowpanes outside.
miss marshall was feeling as lonely and dreary as she looked -- and as she had often felt in her life of sixty years.
she told herself bitterly that she had n't a friend in the world -- not even one who cared enough for her to come and see her or write her a letter now and then.
she thought her boarding-house acquaintances disliked her and she resented their dislike, without admitting to herself that her ungracious ways were responsible for it.
she smiled sourly when little ripples of laughter came faintly down the hall from the front room where the trio were writing their letters and laughing over the fun they were putting into them.
""if they were old and lonesome and friendless they would n't see much in life to laugh at, i guess," said miss marshall bitterly, drawing her shawl closer about her sharp shoulders.
""they never think of anything but themselves and if a day passes that they do n't have "some fun" they think it's a fearful thing to put up with.
i'm sick and tired of their giggling and whispering."
in the midst of these amiable reflections miss marshall heard a knock at her door.
when she opened it there stood nora jane, her broad red face beaming with smiles.
""please, miss, here's a letter for you," she said.
""a letter for me!"
miss marshall shut her door and stared at the fat envelope in amazement.
who could have written it?
the postman came only in the morning.
was it some joke, perhaps?
those giggling girls?
miss marshall's face grew harder as she lighted her lamp and opened the letter suspiciously.
""dear miss marshall," it ran in cyrilla's pretty girlish writing, "we girls are so lonesome and dull that we have decided to write rainy-day letters to everybody in the house just to cheer ourselves up.
so i'm going to write to you just a letter of friendly nonsense."
pages of "nonsense" followed, and very delightful nonsense it was, for cyrilla possessed the happy gift of bright and easy letter-writing.
she commented wittily on all the amusing episodes of the boarding-house life for the past month; she described a cat-fight she had witnessed from her window that morning and illustrated it by a pen-and-ink sketch of the belligerent felines; she described a lovely new dress her mother had sent her from home and told all about the class party to which she had worn it; she gave an account of her vacation camping trip to the mountains and pasted on one page a number of small snapshots taken during the outing; she copied a joke she had read in the paper that morning and discussed the serial story in the boarding-house magazine which all the boarders were reading; she wrote out the directions for a new crocheted tidy her sister had made -- miss marshall had a mania for crocheting; and she finally wound up with "all the good will and good wishes that nora jane will consent to carry from your friend, cyrilla blair."
before miss marshall had finished reading that letter she had cried three times and laughed times past counting.
more tears came at the end -- happy, tender tears such as miss marshall had not shed for years.
something warm and sweet and gentle seemed to thrill to life within her heart.
so those girls were not such selfish, heedless young creatures as she had supposed!
how kind it had been in cyrilla blair to think of her and write so to her.
she no longer felt lonely and neglected.
her whole sombre world had been brightened to sunshine by that merry friendly letter.
mrs. plunkett's table was surrounded by a ring of smiling faces that night.
everybody seemed in good spirits in spite of the weather.
the pale little dressmaker, who had hardly uttered a word since her arrival a week before, talked and laughed quite merrily and girlishly, thanking cyrilla unreservedly for her "jolly letter."
old mr. grant did not grumble once about the rain or the food or his rheumatism and he told carol that she might be a good letter writer in time if she looked after her grammar more carefully -- which, from mr. grant, was high praise.
all the others declared that they were delighted with their letters -- all except miss marshall.
she said nothing but later on, when cyrilla was going upstairs, she met miss marshall in the shadows of the second landing.
""my dear," said miss marshall gently, "i want to thank you for your letter, i do n't think you can realize just what it has meant to me.
i was so -- so lonely and tired and discouraged.
it heartened me right up.
i -- i know you have thought me a cross and disagreeable person.
i'm afraid i have been, too.
but -- but -- i shall try to be less so in future.
if i ca n't succeed all at once do n't mind me because, under it all, i shall always be your friend.
and i mean to keep your letter and read it over every time i feel myself getting bitter and hard again."
""dear miss marshall, i'm so glad you liked it," said cyrilla frankly.
""we're all your friends and would be glad to be chummy with you.
only we thought perhaps we bothered you with our nonsense."
""come and see me sometimes," said miss marshall with a smile.
""i'll try to be "chummy" -- perhaps i'm not yet too old to learn the secret of friendliness.
your letter has made me think that i have missed much in shutting all young life out from mine as i have done.
i want to reform in this respect if i can."
when cyrilla reached the front room she found mrs. plunkett there.
""i've just dropped in, miss blair," said that worthy woman, "to say that i dunno as i mind your making candy once in a while if you want to.
only do be careful not to set the place on fire.
please be particularly careful not to set it on fire."
""we'll try," promised cyrilla with dancing eyes.
when the door closed behind mrs. plunkett the three girls looked at each other.
""cyrilla, that idea of yours was a really truly inspiration," said carol solemnly.
""i believe it was," said cyrilla, thinking of miss marshall.
dorinda's desperate deed dorinda had been home for a whole wonderful week and the little pages were beginning to feel acquainted with her.
when a girl goes away when she is ten and does n't come back until she is fifteen, it is only to be expected that her family should regard her as somewhat of a stranger, especially when she is really a page, and they are really all carters except for the name.
dorinda had been only ten when her aunt mary -- on the carter side -- had written to mrs. page, asking her to let dorinda come to her for the winter.
mrs. page, albeit she was poor -- nobody but herself knew how poor -- and a widow with five children besides dorinda, hesitated at first.
she was afraid, with good reason, that the winter might stretch into other seasons; but mary had lost her own only little girl in the summer, and mrs. page shuddered at the thought of what her loneliness must be.
so, to comfort her, mrs. page had let dorinda go, stipulating that she must come home in the spring.
in the spring, when dorinda's bed of violets was growing purple under the lilac bush, aunt mary wrote again.
dorinda was contented and happy, she said.
would not emily let her stay for the summer?
mrs. page cried bitterly over that letter and took sad counsel with herself.
to let dorinda stay with her aunt for the summer really meant, she knew, to let her stay altogether.
mrs. page was finding it harder and harder to get along; there was so little and the children needed so much; dorinda would have a good home with her aunt mary if she could only prevail on her rebellious mother heart to give her up.
in the end she agreed to let dorinda stay for the summer -- and dorinda had never been home since.
but now dorinda had come back to the little white house on the hill at willowdale, set back from the road in a smother of apple trees and vines.
aunt mary had died very suddenly and her only son, dorinda's cousin, had gone to japan.
there was nothing for dorinda to do save to come home, to enter again into her old unfilled place in her mother's heart, and win a new place in the hearts of the brothers and sisters who barely remembered her at all.
leicester had been nine and jean seven when dorinda went away; now they were respectively fourteen and twelve.
at first they were a little shy with this big, practically brand-new sister, but this soon wore off.
nobody could be shy long with dorinda; nobody could help liking her.
she was so brisk and jolly and sympathetic -- a real page, so everybody said -- while the brothers and sisters were carter to their marrow; carters with fair hair and blue eyes, and small, fine, wistful features; but dorinda had merry black eyes, plump, dusky-red cheeks, and a long braid of glossy dark hair, which was perpetually being twitched from one shoulder to another as dorinda whisked about the house on domestic duties intent.
in a week dorinda felt herself one of the family again, with all the cares and responsibilities thereof resting on her strong young shoulders.
dorinda and her mother talked matters out fully one afternoon over their sewing, in the sunny south room where the winds got lost among the vines halfway through the open window.
mrs. page sighed and said she really did not know what to do.
dorinda did not sigh; she did not know just what to do either, but there must be something that could be done -- there is always something that can be done, if one can only find it.
dorinda sewed hard and pursed up her red lips determinedly.
""do n't you worry, mother page," she said briskly.
""we'll be like that glorious old roman who found a way or made it.
i like overcoming difficulties.
i've lots of old admiral page's fighting blood in me, you know.
the first step is to tabulate just exactly what difficulties among our many difficulties must be ravelled out first -- the capital difficulties, as it were.
most important of all comes --" "leicester," said mrs. page.
dorinda winked her eyes as she always did when she was doubtful.
""well, i knew he was one of them, but i was n't going to put him the very first.
however, we will.
leicester's case stands thus.
he is a pretty smart boy -- if he was n't my brother, i'd say he was a very smart boy.
he has gone as far in his studies as willowdale school can take him, has qualified for entrance into the blue hill academy, wants to go there this fall and begin the beginnings of a college course.
well, of course, mother page, we ca n't send leicester to blue hill any more than we can send him to the moon."
""no," mourned mrs. page, "and the poor boy feels so badly over it.
his heart is set on going to college and being a doctor like his father.
he believes he could work his way through, if he could only get a start.
but there is n't any chance.
and i ca n't afford to keep him at school any longer.
he is going into mr. churchill's store at willow centre in the fall.
mr. churchill has very kindly offered him a place.
leicester hates the thought of it -- i know he does, although he never says so."
""next to leicester's college course we want --" "music lessons for jean."
dorinda winked again.
""are music lessons for jean really a difficulty?"
she said.
""that is, one spelled with a capital?"
""oh, yes, dorinda dear.
at least, i'm worried over it.
jean loves music so, and she has never had anything, poor child, not even as much school as she ought to have had.
i've had to keep her home so much to help me with the work.
she has been such a good, patient little girl too, and her heart is set on music lessons."
""well, she must have them then -- after we get leicester's year at the academy for him.
that's two.
the third is a new --" "the roof must be shingled this fall," said mrs. page anxiously.
""it really must, dorinda.
it is no better than a sieve.
we are nearly drowned every time it rains.
but i do n't know where the money to do it is going to come from."
""shingles for the roof, three," said dorinda, as if she were carefully jotting down something in a mental memorandum.
""and fourth -- now, mother page, i will have my say this time -- fourthly, biggest capital of all, a nice, new dress and a warm fur coat for mother page this winter.
yes, yes, you must have them, dearest.
it's absolutely necessary.
we can wait a year or so for college courses and music lessons to grow; we can set basins under the leaks and borrow some more if we have n't enough.
but a new dress and coat for you we must, shall, and will have, however it is to be brought about."
""i would n't mind if i never got another new stitch, if i could only manage the other things," said mrs. page stoutly.
""if your uncle eugene would only help us a little, until leicester got through!
he really ought to.
but of course he never will."
""have you ever asked him?"
said dorinda.
""oh, my dear, no; of course not," said mrs. page in a horrified tone, as if dorinda had asked if she had ever stolen a neighbour's spoons.
""i do n't see why you should n't," said dorinda seriously.
""oh, dorinda, uncle eugene hates us all.
he is terribly bitter against us.
he would never, never listen to any request for help, even if i could bring myself to make it."
""mother, what was the trouble between us and uncle eugene?
i have never known the rights of it.
i was too small to understand when i was home before.
all i remember is that uncle eugene never came to see us or spoke to us when he met us anywhere, and we were all afraid of him somehow.
i used to think of him as an ogre who would come creeping up the back stairs after dark and carry me off bodily if i was n't good.
what made him our enemy?
and how did he come to get all of grandfather page's property when father got nothing?"
""well, you know, dorinda, that your grandfather page was married twice.
eugene was his first wife's son, and your father the second wife's.
eugene was a great deal older than your father -- he was twenty-five when your father was born.
he was always an odd man, even in his youth, and he had been much displeased at his father's second marriage.
but he was very fond of your father -- whose mother, as you know, died at his birth -- and they were good friends and comrades until just before your father went to college.
they then quarrelled; the cause of the quarrel was insignificant; with anyone else than eugene a reconciliation would soon have been effected.
but eugene never was friendly with your father from that time.
i think he was jealous of old grandfather's affection; thought the old man loved your father best.
and then, as i have said, he was very eccentric and stubborn.
well, your father went away to college and graduated, and then -- we were married.
grandfather page was very angry with him for marrying me.
he wanted him to marry somebody else.
he told him he would disinherit him if he married me.
i did not know this until we were married.
but grandfather page kept his word.
he sent for a lawyer and had a new will made, leaving everything to eugene.
i think, nay, i am sure, that he would have relented in time, but he died the very next week; they found him dead in his bed one morning, so eugene got everything; and that is all there is of the story, dorinda."
""and uncle eugene has been our enemy ever since?"
""yes, ever since.
so you see, dorinda dear, that i can not ask any favours of uncle eugene."
""yes, i see," said dorinda understandingly.
we kept thinking of poor laura and magsie at home, dining off potatoes on thanksgiving!
but at least aunt susanna was satisfied.
when kate and i were washing the dishes she came out quite beamingly.
""well, my dears, i must admit that you made a very good job of the dinner, indeed.
the turkey was done to perfection.
as for the mince pies -- well, of course miranda mary made them, but she must have had extra good luck with them, for they were excellent and heated to just the right degree.
you did n't give anything to the mcginnis dog, i hope?"
""no, we did n't give him anything," said kate.
aunt susanna did not notice the emphasis.
when we had finished the dishes we smuggled our platter and tureen out of the house and went home.
laura and margaret were busy painting and studying and were just as sweet-tempered as if we had n't robbed them of their dinner.
but we had to tell them the whole story before we even took off our hats.
""there is a special providence for children and idiots," said laura gently.
we did n't ask her whether she meant us or tony mcginnis or both.
there are some things better left in obscurity.
i'd have probably said something much sharper than that if anybody had made off with my thanksgiving turkey so unceremoniously.
aunt susanna came down the next day and told margaret that she would send her to college.
also she commissioned laura to paint her a water-color for her dining-room and said she'd pay her five dollars for it.
kate and i were rather left out in the cold in this distribution of favors, but when you come to reflect that laura and magsie had really cooked that dinner, it was only just.
anyway, aunt susanna has never since insinuated that we ca n't cook, and that is as much as we deserve.
by grace of julius caesar melissa sent word on monday evening that she thought we had better go round with the subscription list for cushioning the church pews on tuesday.
i sent back word that i thought we had better go on thursday.
i had no particular objection to tuesday, but melissa is rather fond of settling things without consulting anyone else, and i do n't believe in always letting her have her own way.
melissa is my cousin and we have always been good friends, and i am really very fond of her; but there's no sense in lying down and letting yourself be walked over.
we finally compromised on wednesday.
i always have a feeling of dread when i hear of any new church-project for which money will be needed, because i know perfectly well that melissa and i will be sent round to collect for it.
people say we seem to be able to get more than anybody else; and they appear to think that because melissa is an unencumbered old maid, and i am an unencumbered widow, we can spare the time without any inconvenience to ourselves.
well, we have been canvassing for building funds, and socials, and suppers for years, but it is needed now; at least, i have had enough of it, and i should think melissa has, too.
we started out bright and early on wednesday morning, for jersey cove is a big place and we knew we should need the whole day.
we had to walk because neither of us owned a horse, and anyway it's more nuisance getting out to open and shut gates than it is worth while.
it was a lovely day then, though promising to be hot, and our hearts were as light as could be expected, considering the disagreeable expedition we were on.
i was waiting at my gate for melissa when she came, and she looked me over with wonder and disapproval.
i could see she thought i was a fool to dress up in my second best flowered muslin and my very best hat with the pale pink roses in it to walk about in the heat and dust; but i was n't.
all my experience in canvassing goes to show that the better dressed and better looking you are the more money you'll get -- that is, when it's the men you have to tackle, as in this case.
if it had been the women, however, i would have put on the oldest and ugliest things, consistent with decency, i had.
this was what melissa had done, as it was, and she did look fearfully prim and dowdy, except for her front hair, which was as soft and fluffy and elaborate as usual.
i never could understand how melissa always got it arranged so beautifully.
nothing particular happened the first part of the day.
some few growled and would n't subscribe anything, but on the whole we did pretty well.
if it had been a missionary subscription we should have fared worse; but when it was something touching their own comfort, like cushioning the pews, they came down handsomely.
we reached daniel wilson's by noon, and had to have dinner there.
we did n't eat much, although we were hungry enough -- mary wilson's cooking is a by-word in jersey cove.
no wonder daniel is dyspeptic; but dyspeptic or not, he gave us a big subscription for our cushions and told us we looked younger than ever.
daniel is always very complimentary, and they say mary is jealous.
when we left the wilson's melissa said, with an air of a woman nerving herself to a disagreeable duty: "i suppose we might as well go to isaac appleby's now and get it over."
i agreed with her.
i had been dreading that call all day.
it is n't a very pleasant thing to go to a man you have recently refused to marry and ask him for money; and melissa and i were both in that predicament.
isaac was a well-to-do old bachelor who had never had any notion of getting married until his sister died in the winter.
and then, as soon as the spring planting was over, he began to look round for a wife.
he came to me first and i said "no" good and hard.
i liked isaac well enough; but i was snug and comfortable, and did n't feel like pulling up my roots and moving into another lot; besides, isaac's courting seemed to me a shade too business-like.
i ca n't get along without a little romance; it's my nature.
isaac was disappointed and said so, but intimated that it was n't crushing and that the next best would do very well.
the next best was melissa, and he proposed to her after the decent interval of a fortnight.
melissa also refused him.
i admit i was surprised at this, for i knew melissa was rather anxious to marry; but she has always been down on isaac appleby, from principle, because of a family feud on her mother's side; besides, an old beau of hers, a widower at kingsbridge, was just beginning to take notice again, and i suspected melissa had hopes concerning him.
finally, i imagine melissa did not fancy being second choice.
whatever her reasons were, she refused poor isaac, and that finished his matrimonial prospects as far as jersey cove was concerned, for there was n't another eligible woman in it -- that is, for a man of isaac's age.
i was the only widow, and the other old maids besides melissa were all hopelessly old-maiden.
this was all three months ago, and isaac had been keeping house for himself ever since.
nobody knew much about how he got along, for the appleby house is half a mile from anywhere, down near the shore at the end of a long lane -- the lonesomest place, as i did not fail to remember when i was considering isaac's offer.
""i heard jarvis aldrich say isaac had got a dog lately," said melissa, when we finally came in sight of the house -- a handsome new one, by the way, put up only ten years ago.
""jarvis said it was an imported breed.
i do hope it is n't cross."
i have a mortal horror of dogs, and i followed melissa into the big farmyard with fear and trembling.
we were halfway across the yard when melissa shrieked: "anne, there's the dog!"
there was the dog; and the trouble was that he did n't stay there, but came right down the slope at a steady, business-like trot.
he was a bull-dog and big enough to bite a body clean in two, and he was the ugliest thing in dogs i had ever seen.
melissa and i both lost our heads.
we screamed, dropped our parasols, and ran instinctively to the only refuge that was in sight -- a ladder leaning against the old appleby house.
i am forty-five and something more than plump, so that climbing ladders is not my favorite form of exercise.
but i went up that one with the agility and grace of sixteen.
melissa followed me, and we found ourselves on the roof -- fortunately it was a flat one -- panting and gasping, but safe, unless that diabolical dog could climb a ladder.
i crept cautiously to the edge and peered over.
the beast was sitting on his haunches at the foot of the ladder, and it was quite evident he was not short on time.
the gleam in his eye seemed to say: "i've got you two unprincipled subscription hunters beautifully treed and it's treed you're going to stay.
that is what i call satisfying."
i reported the state of the case to melissa.
""what shall we do?"
i asked.
""do?"
said melissa, snappishly.
""why, stay here till isaac appleby comes out and takes that brute away?
what else can we do?"
""what if he is n't at home?"
i suggested.
""we'll stay here till he comes home.
oh, this is a nice predicament.
this is what comes of cushioning churches!"
""it might be worse," i said comfortingly.
""suppose the roof had n't been flat?"
""call isaac," said melissa shortly.
i did n't fancy calling isaac, but call him i did, and when that failed to bring him melissa condescended to call, too; but scream as we might, no isaac appeared, and that dog sat there and smiled internally.
""it's no use," said melissa sulkily at last.
""isaac appleby is dead or away."
half an hour passed; it seemed as long as a day.
the sun just boiled down on that roof and we were nearly melted.
we were dreadfully thirsty, and the heat made our heads ache, and i could see my muslin dress fading before my very eyes.
as for the roses on my best hat -- but that was too harrowing to think about.
then we saw a welcome sight -- isaac appleby coming through the yard with a hoe over his shoulder.
he had probably been working in his field at the back of the house.
i never thought i should have been so glad to see him.
""isaac, oh, isaac!"
i called joyfully, leaning over as far as i dared.
isaac looked up in amazement at me and melissa craning our necks over the edge of the roof.
then he saw the dog and took in the situation.
the creature actually grinned.
""wo n't you call off your dog and let us get down, isaac?"
i said pleadingly.
isaac stood and reflected for a moment or two.
then he came slowly forward and, before we realized what he was going to do, he took that ladder down and laid it on the ground.
""isaac appleby, what do you mean?"
demanded melissa wrathfully.
isaac folded his arms and looked up.
it would be hard to say which face was the more determined, his or the dog's.
but isaac had the advantage in point of looks, i will say that for him.
""i mean that you two women will stay up on that roof until one of you agrees to marry me," said isaac solemnly.
i gasped.
""isaac appleby, you ca n't be in earnest?"
i cried incredulously.
""you could n't be so mean?"
""i am in earnest.
i want a wife, and i am going to have one.
you two will stay up there, and julius caesar here will watch you until one of you makes up her mind to take me.
you can settle it between yourselves, and let me know when you have come to a decision."
and with that isaac walked jauntily into his new house.
""the man ca n't mean it!"
said melissa.
""he is trying to play a joke on us."
""he does mean it," i said gloomily.
""an appleby never says anything he does n't mean.
he will keep us here until one of us consents to marry him."
""it wo n't be me, then," said melissa in a calm sort of rage.
""i wo n't marry him if i have to sit on this roof for the rest of my life.
you can take him.
it's really you he wants, anyway; he asked you first."
i always knew that rankled with melissa.
i thought the situation over before i said anything more.
we certainly could n't get off that roof, and if we could, there was julius caesar.
the place was out of sight of every other house in jersey cove, and nobody might come near it for a week.
to be sure, when melissa and i did n't turn up the covites might get out and search for us; but that would n't be for two or three days anyhow.
melissa had turned her back on me and was sitting with her elbows propped up on her knees, looking gloomily out to sea.
i was afraid i could n't coax her into marrying isaac.
as for me, i had n't any real objection to marrying him, after all, for if he was short of romance he was good-natured and has a fat bank account; but i hated to be driven into it that way.
""you'd better take him, melissa," i said entreatingly.
""i've had one husband and that is enough."
""more than enough for me, thank you," said melissa sarcastically.
""isaac is a fine man and has a lovely house; and you are n't sure the kingsbridge man really means anything," i went on.
""i would rather," said melissa, with the same awful calmness, "jump down from this roof and break my neck, or be devoured piecemeal by that fiend down there than marry isaac appleby."
it did n't seem worth while to say anything more after that.
we sat there in stony silence and the time dragged by.
i was hot, hungry, thirsty, cross; and besides, i felt that i was in a ridiculous position, which was worse than all the rest.
we could see isaac sitting in the shade of one of his apple trees in the front orchard comfortably reading a newspaper.
i think if he had n't aggravated me by doing that i'd have given in sooner.
but as it was, i was determined to be as stubborn as everybody else.
we were four obstinate creatures -- isaac and melissa and julius caesar and i.
at four o'clock isaac got up and went into the house; in a few minutes he came out again with a basket in one hand and a ball of cord in the other.
""i do n't intend to starve you, of course, ladies," he said politely, "i will throw this ball up to you and you can then draw up the basket."
i caught the ball, for melissa never turned her head.
i would have preferred to be scornful, too, and reject the food altogether; but i was so dreadfully thirsty that i put my pride in my pocket and hauled the basket up.
besides, i thought it might enable us to hold out until some loophole of escape presented itself.
isaac went back into the house and i unpacked the basket.
there was a bottle of milk, some bread and butter, and a pie.
melissa would n't take a morsel of the food, but she was so thirsty she had to take a drink of milk.
she tried to lift her veil -- and something caught; melissa gave it a savage twitch, and off came veil and hat -- and all her front hair!
you never saw such a sight.
i'd always suspected melissa wore a false front, but i'd never had any proof before.
melissa pinned on her hair again and put on her hat and drank the milk, all without a word; but she was purple.
i felt sorry for her.
and i felt sorry for isaac when i tried to eat that bread.
it was sour and dreadful.
as for the pie, it was hopeless.
i tasted it, and then threw it down to julius caesar.
julius caesar, not being over particular, ate it up.
i thought perhaps it would kill him, for anything might come of eating such a concoction.
that pie was a strong argument for isaac.
i thought a man who had to live on such cookery did indeed need a wife and might be pardoned for taking desperate measures to get one.
i was dreadfully tired of broiling on the roof anyhow.
but it was the thunderstorm that decided me.
when i saw it coming up, black and quick, from the northwest, i gave in at once.
i had endured a good deal and was prepared to endure more; but i had paid ten dollars for my hat and i was not going to have it ruined by a thunderstorm.
i called to isaac and out he came.
""if you will let us down and promise to dispose of that dog before i come here i will marry you, isaac," i said, "but i'll make you sorry for it afterwards, though."
""i'll take the risk of that, anne," he said; "and, of course, i'll sell the dog.
i wo n't need him when i have you."
isaac meant to be complimentary, though you might n't have thought so if you had seen the face of that dog.
isaac ordered julius caesar away and put up the ladder, and turned his back, real considerately, while we climbed down.
we had to go in his house and stay till the shower was over.
i did n't forget the object of our call and i produced our subscription list at once.
""how much have you got?"
asked isaac.
""seventy dollars and we want a hundred and fifty," i said.
""you may put me down for the remaining eighty, then," said isaac calmly.
the applebys are never mean where money is concerned, i must say.
isaac offered to drive us home when it cleared up, but i said "no."
i wanted to settle melissa before she got a chance to talk.
on the way home i said to her: "i hope you wo n't mention this to anyone, melissa.
i do n't mind marrying isaac, but i do n't want people to know how it came about."
""oh, i wo n't say anything about it," said melissa, laughing a little disagreeably.
""because," i said, to clinch the matter, looking significantly at her front hair as i said it, "i have something to tell, too."
melissa will hold her tongue.
by the rule of contrary "look here, burton," said old john ellis in an ominous tone of voice, "i want to know if what that old busybody of a mary keane came here today gossiping about is true.
if it is -- well, i've something to say about the matter!
have you been courting that niece of susan oliver's all summer on the sly?"
burton ellis's handsome, boyish face flushed darkly crimson to the roots of his curly black hair.
something in the father's tone roused anger and rebellion in the son.
he straightened himself up from the turnip row he was hoeing, looked his father squarely in the face, and said quietly, "not on the sly, sir, i never do things that way.
but i have been going to see madge oliver for some time, and we are engaged.
we are thinking of being married this fall, and we hope you will not object."
burton's frankness nearly took away his father's breath.
old john fairly choked with rage.
""you young fool," he spluttered, bringing down his hoe with such energy that he sliced off half a dozen of his finest young turnip plants, "have you gone clean crazy?
no, sir, i'll never consent to your marrying an oliver, and you need n't have any idea that i will."
""then i'll marry her without your consent," retorted burton angrily, losing the temper he had been trying to keep.
""oh, will you indeed!
well, if you do, out you go, and not a cent of my money or a rod of my land do you ever get."
""what have you got against madge?"
asked burton, forcing himself to speak calmly, for he knew his father too well to doubt for a minute that he meant and would do just what he said.
""she's an oliver," said old john crustily, "and that's enough."
and considering that he had settled the matter, john ellis threw down his hoe and left the field in a towering rage.
burton hoed away savagely until his anger had spent itself on the weeds.
give up madge -- dear, sweet little madge?
not he!
yet if his father remained of the same mind, their marriage was out of the question at present.
and burton knew quite well that his father would remain of the same mind.
old john ellis had the reputation of being the most contrary man in greenwood.
when burton had finished his row he left the turnip field and went straight across lots to see madge and tell her his dismal story.
an hour later miss susan oliver went up the stairs of her little brown house to madge's room and found her niece lying on the bed, her pretty curls tumbled, her soft cheeks flushed crimson, crying as if her heart would break.
miss susan was a tall, grim, angular spinster who looked like the last person in the world to whom a love affair might be confided.
but never were appearances more deceptive than in this case.
behind her unprepossessing exterior miss susan had a warm, sympathetic heart filled to the brim with kindly affection for her pretty niece.
she had seen burton ellis going moodily across the fields homeward and guessed that something had gone wrong.
""now, dearie, what is the matter?"
she said, tenderly patting the brown head.
madge sobbed out the whole story disconsolately.
burton's father would not let him marry her because she was an oliver.
and, oh, what would she do?
""do n't worry, madge," said miss susan comfortingly.
""i'll soon settle old john ellis."
""why, what can you do?"
asked madge forlornly.
miss susan squared her shoulders and looked amused.
""you'll see.
i know old john ellis better than he knows himself.
he is the most contrary man the lord ever made.
i went to school with him.
i learned how to manage him then, and i have n't forgotten how.
i'm going straight up to interview him."
""are you sure that will do any good?"
said madge doubtfully.
""if you go to him and take burton's and my part, wo n't it only make him worse?"
""madge, dear," said miss susan, busily twisting her scanty, iron-grey hair up into a hard little knob at the back of her head before madge's glass, "you just wait.
i'm not young, and i'm not pretty, and i'm not in love, but i've more gumption than you and burton have or ever will have.
you keep your eyes open and see if you can learn something.
you'll need it if you go up to live with old john ellis."
burton had returned to the turnip field, but old john ellis was taking his ease with a rampant political newspaper on the cool verandah of his house.
looking up from a bitter editorial to chuckle over a cutting sarcasm contained therein, he saw a tall, angular figure coming up the lane with aggressiveness written large in every fold and flutter of shawl and skirt.
""old susan oliver, as sure as a gun," said old john with another chuckle.
""she looks mad clean through.
i suppose she's coming here to blow me up for refusing to let burton take that girl of hers.
she's been angling and scheming for it for years, but she will find who she has to deal with.
come on, miss susan."
john ellis laid down his paper and stood up with a sarcastic smile.
miss susan reached the steps and skimmed undauntedly up them.
she did indeed look angry and disturbed.
without any preliminary greeting she burst out into a tirade that simply took away her complacent foe's breath.
""look here, john ellis, i want to know what this means.
i've discovered that that young upstart of a son of yours, who ought to be in short trousers yet, has been courting my niece, madge oliver, all summer.
he has had the impudence to tell me that he wants to marry her.
i wo n't have it, i tell you, and you can tell your son so.
marry my niece indeed!
a pretty pass the world is coming to!
i'll never consent to it."
perhaps if you had searched greenwood and all the adjacent districts thoroughly you might have found a man who was more astonished and taken aback than old john ellis was at that moment, but i doubt it.
the wind was completely taken out of his sails and every bit of the ellis contrariness was roused.
""what have you got to say against my son?"
he fairly shouted in his rage.
""is n't he good enough for your girl, susan oliver, i'd like to know?"
""no, he is n't," retorted miss susan deliberately and unflinchingly.
""he's well enough in his place, but you'll please to remember, john ellis, that my niece is an oliver, and the olivers do n't marry beneath them."
old john was furious.
""beneath them indeed!
why, woman, it is condescension in my son to so much as look at your niece -- condescension, that is what it is.
you are as poor as church mice."
""we come of good family, though," retorted miss susan.
""you ellises are nobodies.
your grandfather was a hired man!
and yet you have the presumption to think you're fit to marry into an old, respectable family like the olivers.
but talking does n't signify.
i simply wo n't allow this nonsense to go on.
i came here today to tell you so plump and plain.
it's your duty to stop it; if you do n't i will, that's all."
""oh, will you?"
john ellis was at a white heat of rage and stubbornness now.
""we'll see, miss susan, we'll see.
my son shall marry whatever girl he pleases, and i'll back him up in it -- do you hear that?
come here and tell me my son is n't good enough for your niece indeed!
i'll show you he can get her anyway."
""you've heard what i've said," was the answer, "and you'd better go by it, that's all.
i sha n't stay to bandy words with you, john ellis.
i'm going home to talk to my niece and tell her her duty plain, and what i want her to do, and she'll do it, i have n't a fear."
miss susan was halfway down the steps, but john ellis ran to the railing of the verandah to get the last word.
""i'll send burton down this evening to talk to her and tell her what he wants her to do, and we'll see whether she'll sooner listen to you than to him," he shouted.
miss susan deigned no reply.
old john strode out to the turnip field.
burton saw him coming and looked for another outburst of wrath, but his father's first words almost took away his breath.
""see here, burt, i take back all i said this afternoon.
i want you to marry madge oliver now, and the sooner, the better.
that old cat of a susan had the face to come up and tell me you were n't good enough for her niece.
i told her a few plain truths.
do n't you mind the old crosspatch.
i'll back you up."
by this time burton had begun hoeing vigorously, to hide the amused twinkle of comprehension in his eyes.
he admired miss susan's tactics, but he did not say so.
""all right, father," he answered dutifully.
when miss susan reached home she told madge to bathe her eyes and put on her new pink muslin, because she guessed burton would be down that evening.
""oh, auntie, how did you manage it?"
cried madge.
""madge," said miss susan solemnly, but with dancing eyes, "do you know how to drive a pig?
just try to make it go in the opposite direction and it will bolt the way you want it.
remember that, my dear."
fair exchange and no robbery katherine rangely was packing up.
her chum and roommate, edith wilmer, was sitting on the bed watching her in that calm disinterested fashion peculiarly maddening to a bewildered packer.
""it does seem too provoking," said katherine, as she tugged at an obstinate shawl strap, "that ned should be transferred here now, just when i'm going away.
the powers that be might have waited until vacation was over.
ned wo n't know a soul here and he'll be horribly lonesome."
""i'll do my best to befriend him, with your permission," said edith consolingly.
""oh, i know.
you're a special providence, ede.
ned will be up tonight first thing, of course, and i'll introduce him.
try to keep the poor fellow amused until i get back.
two months!
just fancy!
and aunt elizabeth wo n't abate one jot or tittle of the time i promised to stay with her.
harbour hill is so frightfully dull, too."
then the talk drifted around to edith's affairs.
she was engaged to a certain sidney keith, who was a professor in some college.
""i do n't expect to see much of sidney this summer," said edith.
""he's writing another book.
he is so terribly addicted to literature."
""how lovely," sighed katherine, who had aspirations in that line herself.
""if only ned were like him i should be perfectly happy.
but ned is so prosaic.
he does n't care a rap for poetry, and he laughs when i enthuse.
it makes him quite furious when i talk of taking up writing seriously.
he says women writers are an abomination on the face of the earth.
did you ever hear anything so ridiculous?"
""he is very handsome, though," said edith, with a glance at his photograph on katherine's dressing table.
""and that is what sid is not.
he is rather distinguished looking, but as plain as he can possibly be."
edith sighed.
she had a weakness for handsome men and thought it rather hard that fate should have allotted her so plain a lover.
""he has lovely eyes," said katherine comfortingly, "and handsome men are always vain.
even ned is.
i have to snub him regularly.
but i think you'll like him."
edith thought so too when ned ellison appeared that night.
he was a handsome off-handed young fellow, who seemed to admire katherine immensely, and be a little afraid of her into the bargain.
""edith will try to make riverton pleasant for you while i am away," she told him in their good-bye chat.
""she is a dear girl -- you'll like her, i know.
it's really too bad i have to go away now, but it ca n't be helped."
""i shall be awfully lonesome," grumbled ned.
""do n't you forget to write regularly, kitty."
""of course i'll write, but for pity's sake, ned, do n't call me kitty.
it sounds so childish.
well, bye-bye, dear boy.
i'll be back in two months and then we'll have a lovely time."
* * * * * when katherine had been at harbour hill for a week she wondered how upon earth she was going to put in the remaining seven.
harbour hill was noted for its beauty, but not every woman can live by scenery alone.
""aunt elizabeth," said katherine one day, "does anybody ever die in harbour hill?
because it does n't seem to me it would be any change for them if they did."
aunt elizabeth's only reply to this was a shocked look.
to pass the time katherine took to collecting seaweeds, and this involved long tramps along the shore.
on one of these occasions she met with an adventure.
the place was a remote spot far up the shore.
katherine had taken off her shoes and stockings, tucked up her skirt, rolled her sleeves high above her dimpled elbows, and was deep in the absorbing process of fishing up seaweeds off a craggy headland.
she looked anything but dignified while so employed, but under the circumstances dignity did not matter.
presently she heard a shout from the shore and, turning around in dismay, she beheld a man on the rocks behind her.
he was evidently shouting at her.
what on earth could the creature want?
""come in," he called, gesticulating wildly.
""you'll be in the bottomless pit in another moment if you do n't look out."
""he certainly must be a lunatic," said katherine to herself, "or else he's drunk.
what am i to do?"
""come in, i tell you," insisted the stranger.
""what in the world do you mean by wading out to such a place?
why, it's madness."
katherine's indignation got the better of her fear.
""i do not think i am trespassing," she called back as icily as possible.
the stranger did not seem to be snubbed at all.
he came down to the very edge of the rocks where katherine could see him plainly.
he was dressed in a somewhat well-worn grey suit and wore spectacles.
he did not look like a lunatic, and he did not seem to be drunk.
""i implore you to come in," he said earnestly.
""you must be standing on the very brink of the bottomless pit."
he is certainly off his balance, thought katherine.
he must be some revivalist who has gone insane on one point.
i suppose i'd better go in.
he looks quite capable of wading out here after me if i do n't.
she picked her steps carefully back with her precious specimens.
the stranger eyed her severely as she stepped on the rocks.
""i should think you would have more sense than to risk your life in that fashion for a handful of seaweeds," he said.
""i have n't the faintest idea what you mean," said miss rangely.
""you do n't look crazy, but you talk as if you were."
""do you mean to say you do n't know that what the people hereabouts call the bottomless pit is situated right off that point -- the most dangerous spot along the whole coast?"
""no, i did n't," said katherine, horrified.
she remembered now that aunt elizabeth had warned her to be careful of some bad hole along shore, but she had not been paying much attention and had supposed it to be in quite another direction.
""i am a stranger here."
""well, i hardly thought you'd be foolish enough to be out there if you knew," said the other in mollified accents.
""the place ought not to be left without warning, anyhow.
it is the most careless thing i ever heard of.
there is a big hole right off that point and nobody has ever been able to find the bottom of it.
a person who got into it would never be heard of again.
the rocks there form an eddy that sucks everything right down."
""i am very grateful to you for calling me in," said katherine humbly.
""i had no idea i was in such danger."
""you have a very fine bunch of seaweeds, i see," said the unknown.
but katherine was in no mood to converse on seaweeds.
she suddenly realized what she must look like -- bare feet, draggled skirts, dripping arms.
and this creature whom she had taken for a lunatic was undoubtedly a gentleman.
oh, if he would only go and give her a chance to put on her shoes and stockings!
nothing seemed further from his intentions.
when katherine had picked up the aforesaid articles and turned homeward, he walked beside her, still discoursing on seaweeds as eloquently as if he were commonly accustomed to walking with barefooted young women.
in spite of herself, katherine could n't help listening to him, for he managed to invest seaweeds with an absorbing interest.
she finally decided that as he did n't seem to mind her bare feet, she would n't either.
he knew so much about seaweeds that katherine felt decidedly amateurish beside him.
he looked over her specimens and pointed out the valuable ones.
he explained the best method of preserving and mounting them, and told her of other and less dangerous places along the shore where she might get some new varieties.
when they came in sight of harbour hill, katherine began to wonder what on earth she would do with him.
it was n't exactly permissible to snub a man who had practically saved your life, but, on the other hand, the prospect of walking through the principal street of harbour hill barefooted and escorted by a scholarly looking gentleman discoursing on seaweeds was not to be calmly contemplated.
the unknown cut the gordian knot himself.
he said that he must really go back or he would be late for dinner, lifted his hat politely, and departed.
katherine waited until he was out of sight, then sat down on the sand and put on her shoes and stockings.
""who on earth can he be?"
she said to herself.
""and where have i seen him before?
there was certainly something familiar about his appearance.
he is very nice, but he must have thought me crazy.
i wonder if he belongs to harbour hill."
the mystery was solved when she got home and found a letter from edith awaiting her.
""i see ned quite often," wrote the latter, "and i think he is perfectly splendid.
you are a lucky girl, kate.
but oh, do you know that sidney is actually at harbour hill, too, or at least quite near it?
i had a letter from him yesterday.
he has gone down there to spend his vacation, because it is so quiet, and to finish up some horrid scientific book he is working at.
he's boarding at some little farmhouse up the shore.
i've written to him today to hunt you up and consider himself introduced to you.
i think you'll like him, for he's just your style."
katherine smiled when sidney keith's card was brought up to her that evening and went down to meet him.
her companion of the morning rose to meet her.
""you!"
he said.
""yes, me," said miss rangely cheerfully and ungrammatically.
""you did n't expect it, did you?
i was sure i had seen you before -- only it was n't you but your photograph."
when professor keith went away it was with a cordial invitation to call again.
he did not fail to avail himself of it -- in fact, he became a constant visitor at sycamore villa.
katherine wrote all about it to edith and cultivated professor keith with a dear conscience.
they got on capitally together.
they went on long expeditions up shore after seaweeds, and when seaweeds were exhausted they began to make a collection of the harbour hill flora.
this involved more long, companionable expeditions.
katherine sometimes wondered when professor keith found time to work on his book, but as he made no reference to the subject, neither did she.
once in a while, when she had time to think of them, she wondered how ned and edith were getting on.
at first edith's letters had been full of ned, but in her last two or three she had said little about him.
katherine wrote and jokingly asked edith if she and ned had quarreled.
edith wrote back and said, "what nonsense."
she and ned were as good friends as ever, but he was getting acquainted in riverton now and was n't so dependent on her society, etc..
katherine sighed and went on a fern hunt with professor keith.
it was getting near the end of her vacation and she had only two weeks more.
they were sitting down to rest on the side of the road when she mentioned this fact inconsequently.
the professor prodded the harmless dust with his cane.
well, he supposed she would find a return to work pleasant and would doubtless be glad to see her riverton friends again.
""i'm dying to see edith," said katherine.
""and ned?"
suggested professor keith.
""oh yes.
ned, of course," assented katherine without enthusiasm.
there did n't seem to be anything more to say.
one can not talk everlastingly about ferns, so they got up and went home.
katherine wrote a particularly affectionate letter to ned that night.
then she went to bed and cried.
when professor keith came up to bid miss rangely good-bye on the eve of her departure from harbour hill, he looked like a man who was being led to execution without benefit of clergy.
but he kept himself well in hand and talked calmly on impersonal subjects.
after all, it was katherine who made the first break when she got up to say good-bye.
she was in the middle of some conventional sentence when she suddenly stopped short, and her voice trailed off in a babyish quiver.
the professor put out his arm and drew her close to him.
his hat dropped under their feet and was trampled on, but i doubt if professor keith knows the difference to this day, for he was fully absorbed in kissing katherine's hair.
when she became cognizant of this fact, she drew herself away.
""oh, sidney, do n't!
-- think of edith!
i feel like a traitor."
""do you think she would care very much if i -- if you -- if we --" hesitated the professor.
""oh, it would break her heart," cried katherine with convincing earnestness.
""i know it would -- and ned's too.
they must never know."
the professor stooped and began hunting for his maltreated hat.
he was a long time finding it, and when he did he went softly to the door.
with his hand on the knob, he paused and looked back.
""good-bye, miss rangely," he said softly.
but katherine, whose face was buried in the cushions of the lounge, did not hear him and when she looked up he was gone.
* * * * * katharine felt that life was stale, flat and unprofitable when she alighted at riverton station in the dusk of the next evening.
she was not expected until a later train and there was no one to meet her.
she walked drearily through the streets to her boarding house and entered her room unannounced.
edith, who was lying on the bed, sprang up with a surprised greeting.
it was too dark to be sure, but katherine had an uncomfortable suspicion that her friend had been crying, and her heart quaked guiltily.
could edith have suspected anything?
""why, we did n't think you'd be up till the 8:30 train, and ned and i were going to meet you."
""i found i could catch an earlier train, so i took it," said katherine, as she dropped listlessly into a chair.
""i am tired to death and i have such a headache.
i ca n't see anyone tonight, not even ned."
""you poor dear," said edith sympathetically, beginning a search for the cologne.
""lie down on the bed and i'll bathe your poor head.
did you have a good time at harbour hill?
and how did you leave sid?
did he say anything about coming up?"
""oh, he was quite well," said katherine wearily.
""i did n't hear him say if he intended to come up or not.
there, thanks -- that will do nicely."
after edith had gone down, katherine tossed about restlessly.
she knew ned had come and she did not want to see him.
but, after all, it was only putting off the evil day, and it was treating him rather shabbily.
she would go down for a minute.
there were two doors to the parlour, and katherine went by way of the library one, over which a portiere was hanging.
her hand was lifted to draw it back when she heard something that arrested the movement.
a woman was crying in the room beyond.
it was edith -- and what was she saying?
""oh, ned, it is all perfectly dreadful!
i could n't look catherine in the face when she came home.
i'm so ashamed of myself and i never meant to be so false.
we must never let her suspect for a minute."
""it's pretty rough on a fellow," said another voice -- ned's voice -- in a choked sort of a way.
""upon my word, edith, i do n't see how i'm going to keep it up."
""you must," sobbed edith.
""it would break her heart -- and sidney's too.
we must just make up our minds to forget each other, ned, and you must marry katherine."
just at this point katherine became aware that she was eavesdropping and she went away noiselessly.
she did not look in the least like a person who has received a mortal blow, and she had forgotten her headache altogether.
when edith came up half an hour later, she found the worn-out invalid sitting up and reading a novel.
""how is your headache, dear?"
she asked, carefully keeping her face turned away from katherine.
""oh, it's all gone," said miss rangely cheerfully.
""why did n't you come down then?
ned was here."
""well, ede, i did go down, but i thought i was n't particularly wanted, so i came back."
edith faced her friend in dismay, forgetful of swollen lids and tear-stained cheeks.
""katherine!"
""do n't look so conscience stricken, my dear child.
there is no harm done."
""you heard --" "some surprising speeches.
so you and ned have gone and fallen in love with one another?"
""oh, katherine," sobbed edith, "we -- we -- could n't help it -- but it's all over.
oh, do n't be angry with me!"
""angry?
my dear, i'm delighted."
""delighted?"
""yes, you dear goose.
ca n't you guess, or must i tell you?
sidney and i did the very same, and had just such a melancholy parting last night as i suspect you and ned had tonight."
""katherine!"
""yes, it's quite true.
and of course we made up our minds to sacrifice ourselves on the altar of duty and all that.
but now, thank goodness, there is no need of such wholesale immolation.
so just let's forgive each other."
""oh," sighed edith happily, "it is almost too good to be true."
""it is really providentially ordered, is n't it?"
said katherine.
""ned and i would never have got on together in the world, and you and sidney would have bored each other to death.
as it is, there will be four perfectly happy people instead of four miserable ones.
i'll tell ned so tomorrow."
four winds alan douglas threw down his pen with an impatient exclamation.
it was high time his next sunday's sermon was written, but he could not concentrate his thoughts on his chosen text.
for one thing he did not like it and had selected it only because elder trewin, in his call of the evening before, had hinted that it was time for a good stiff doctrinal discourse, such as his predecessor in rexton, the rev. jabez strong, had delighted in.
alan hated doctrines -- "the soul's staylaces," he called them -- but elder trewin was a man to be reckoned with and alan preached an occasional sermon to please him.
""it's no use," he said wearily.
""i could have written a sermon in keeping with that text in november or midwinter, but now, when the whole world is reawakening in a miracle of beauty and love, i ca n't do it.
if a northeast rainstorm does n't set in before next sunday, mr. trewin will not have his sermon.
i shall take as my text instead, "the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds has come.""
he rose and went to his study window, outside of which a young vine was glowing in soft tender green tints, its small dainty leaves casting quivering shadows on the opposite wall where the portrait of alan's mother hung.
she had a fine, strong, sweet face; the same face, cast in a masculine mould, was repeated in her son, and the resemblance was striking as he stood in the searching evening sunshine.
the black hair grew around his forehead in the same way; his eyes were steel blue, like hers, with a similar expression, half brooding, half tender, in their depths.
he had the mobile, smiling mouth of the picture, but his chin was deeper and squarer, dented with a dimple which, combined with a certain occasional whimsicality of opinion and glance, had caused elder trewin some qualms of doubt regarding the fitness of this young man for his high and holy vocation.
the rev. jabez strong had never indulged in dimples or jokes; but then, as elder trewin, being a just man, had to admit, the rev. jabez strong had preached many a time and oft to more empty pews than full ones, while now the church was crowded to its utmost capacity on sundays and people came to hear mr. douglas who had not darkened a church door for years.
all things considered, elder trewin decided to overlook the dimple.
there was sure to be some drawback in every minister.
alan from his study looked down on all the length of the rexton valley, at the head of which the manse was situated, and thought that eden might have looked so in its innocence, for all the orchards were abloom and the distant hills were tremulous and aerial in springtime gauzes of pale purple and pearl.
but in any garden, despite its beauty, is an element of tameness and domesticity, and alan's eyes, after a moment's delighted gazing, strayed wistfully off to the north where the hills broke away into a long sloping lowland of pine and fir.
beyond it stretched the wide expanse of the lake, flashing in the molten gold and crimson of evening.
its lure was irresistible.
alan had been born and bred beside a faraway sea and the love of it was strong in his heart -- so strong that he knew he must go back to it sometime.
meanwhile, the great lake, mimicking the sea in its vast expanse and the storms that often swept over it, was his comfort and solace.
as often as he could he stole away to its wild and lonely shore, leaving the snug bounds of cultivated home lands behind him with something like a sense of relief.
down there by the lake was a primitive wilderness where man was as naught and man-made doctrines had no place.
there one might walk hand in hand with nature and so come very close to god.
many of alan's best sermons were written after he had come home, rapt-eyed, from some long shore tramp where the wilderness had opened its heart to him and the pines had called to him in their soft, sibilant speech.
with a half guilty glance at the futile sermon, he took his hat and went out.
the sun of the cool spring evening was swinging low over the lake as he turned into the unfrequented, deep-rutted road leading to the shore.
it was two miles to the lake, but half way there alan came to where another road branched off and struck down through the pines in a northeasterly direction.
he had sometimes wondered where it led but he had never explored it.
now he had a sudden whim to do so and turned into it.
it was even rougher and lonelier than the other; between the ruts the grasses grew long and thickly; sometimes the pine boughs met overhead; again, the trees broke away to reveal wonderful glimpses of gleaming water, purple islets, dark feathery coasts.
still, the road seemed to lead nowhere and alan was half repenting the impulse which had led him to choose it when he suddenly came out from the shadow of the pines and found himself gazing on a sight which amazed him.
before him was a small peninsula running out into the lake and terminating in a long sandy point.
beyond it was a glorious sweep of sunset water.
the peninsula itself seemed barren and sandy, covered for the most part with scrub firs and spruces, through which the narrow road wound on to what was the astonishing; feature in the landscape -- a grey and weather-beaten house built almost at the extremity of the point and shadowed from the western light by a thick plantation of tall pines behind it.
it was the house which puzzled alan.
he had never known there was any house near the lake shore -- had never heard mention made of any; yet here was one, and one which was evidently occupied, for a slender spiral of smoke was curling upward from it on the chilly spring air.
it could not be a fisherman's dwelling, for it was large and built after a quaint tasteful design.
the longer alan looked at it the more his wonder grew.
the people living here were in the bounds of his congregation.
how then was it that he had never seen or heard of them?
he sauntered slowly down the road until he saw that it led directly to the house and ended in the yard.
then he turned off in a narrow path to the shore.
he was not far from the house now and he scanned it observantly as he went past.
the barrens swept almost up to its door in front but at the side, sheltered from the lake winds by the pines, was a garden where there was a fine show of gay tulips and golden daffodils.
no living creature was visible and, in spite of the blossoming geraniums and muslin curtains at the windows and the homely spiral of smoke, the place had a lonely, almost untenanted, look.
when alan reached the shore he found that it was of a much more open and less rocky nature than the part which he had been used to frequent.
the beach was of sand and the scrub barrens dwindled down to it almost insensibly.
to right and left fir-fringed points ran out into the lake, shaping a little cove with the house in its curve.
alan walked slowly towards the left headland, intending to follow the shore around to the other road.
as he passed the point he stopped short in astonishment.
the second surprise and mystery of the evening confronted him.
a little distance away a girl was standing -- a girl who turned a startled face at his unexpected appearance.
alan douglas had thought he knew all the girls in rexton, but this lithe, glorious creature was a stranger to him.
she stood with her hand on the head of a huge, tawny collie dog; another dog was sitting on his haunches beside her.
she was tall, with a great braid of shining chestnut hair, showing ruddy burnished tints where the sunlight struck it, hanging over her shoulder.
the plain dark dress she wore emphasized the grace and strength of her supple form.
her face was oval and pale, with straight black brows and a finely cut crimson mouth -- a face whose beauty bore the indefinable stamp of race and breeding mingled with a wild sweetness, as of a flower growing in some lonely and inaccessible place.
none of the rexton girls looked like that.
who, in the name of all that was amazing, could she be?
as the thought crossed alan's mind the girl turned, with an air of indifference that might have seemed slightly overdone to a calmer observer than was the young minister at that moment and, with a gesture of command to her dogs, walked quickly away into the scrub spruces.
she was so tall that her uncovered head was visible over them as she followed some winding footpath, and alan stood like a man rooted to the ground until he saw her enter the grey house.
then he went homeward in a maze, all thought of sermons, doctrinal or otherwise, for the moment knocked out of his head.
she is the most beautiful woman i ever saw, he thought.
how is it possible that i have lived in rexton for six months and never heard of her or of that house?
well, i daresay there's some simple explanation of it all.
the place may have been unoccupied until lately -- probably it is the summer residence of people who have only recently come to it.
i'll ask mrs. danby.
she'll know if anybody will.
that good woman knows everything about everybody in rexton for three generations back.
alan found isabel king with his housekeeper when he got home.
his greeting was tinged with a slight constraint.
he was not a vain man, but he could not help knowing that isabel looked upon him with a favour that had in it much more than professional interest.
isabel herself showed it with sufficient distinctness.
moreover, he felt a certain personal dislike of her and of her hard, insistent beauty, which seemed harder and more insistent than ever contrasted with his recollection of the girl of the lake shore.
isabel had a trick of coming to the manse on plausible errands to mrs. danby and lingering until it was so dark that alan was in courtesy bound to see her home.
the ruse was a little too patent and amused alan, although he carefully hid his amusement and treated isabel with the fine unvarying deference which his mother had engrained into him for womanhood -- a deference that flattered isabel even while it annoyed her with the sense of a barrier which she could not break down or pass.
she was the daughter of the richest man in rexton and inclined to give herself airs on that account, but alan's gentle indifference always brought home to her an unwelcome feeling of inferiority.
""you've been tiring yourself out again tramping that lake shore, i suppose," said mrs. danby, who had kept house for three bachelor ministers and consequently felt entitled to hector them in a somewhat maternal fashion.
""not tiring myself -- resting and refreshing myself rather," smiled alan.
""i was tired when i went out but now i feel like a strong man rejoicing to run a race.
by the way, mrs. danby, who lives in that quaint old house away down at the very shore?
i never knew of its existence before."
alan's "by the way" was not quite so indifferent as he tried to make it.
isabel king, leaning back posingly among the cushions of the lounge, sat quickly up as he asked his question.
""dear me, you do n't mean to say you've never heard of captain anthony -- captain anthony oliver?"
said mrs. danby.
""he lives down there at four winds, as they call it -- he and his daughter and an old cousin."
isabel king bent forward, her brown eyes on alan's face.
""did you see lynde oliver?"
she asked with suppressed eagerness.
alan ignored the question -- perhaps he did not hear it.
""have they lived there long?"
he asked.
""for eighteen years," said mrs. danby placidly.
""it's funny you have n't heard them mentioned.
but people do n't talk much about the captain now -- he's an old story -- and of course they never go anywhere, not even to church.
the captain is a rank infidel and they say his daughter is just as bad.
to be sure, nobody knows much about her, but it stands to reason that a girl who's had her bringing up must be odd, to say no worse of her.
it's not really her fault, i suppose -- her wicked old scalawag of a father is to blame for it.
she's never darkened a church or school door in her life and they say she's always been a regular tomboy -- running wild outdoors with dogs, and fishing and shooting like a man.
nobody ever goes there -- the captain does n't want visitors.
he must have done something dreadful in his time, if it was only known, when he's so set on living like a hermit away down on that jumping-off place.
did you see any of them?"
""i saw miss oliver, i suppose," said alan briefly.
""at least i met a young lady on the shore.
but where did these people come from?
surely more is known of them than this."
""precious little.
the truth is, mr. douglas, folks do n't think the olivers respectable and do n't want to have anything to do with them.
eighteen years ago captain anthony came from goodness knows where, bought the four winds point, and built that house.
he said he'd been a sailor all his life and could n't live away from the water.
he brought his wife and child and an old cousin of his with him.
this lynde was n't more than two years old then.
people went to call but they never saw any of the women and the captain let them see they were n't wanted.
some of the men who'd been working round the place saw his wife and said she was sickly but real handsome and like a lady, but she never seemed to want to see anyone or be seen herself.
there was a story that the captain had been a smuggler and that if he was caught he'd be sent to prison.
oh, there were all sorts of yarns, mostly coming from the men who worked there, for nobody else ever got inside the house.
well, four years ago his wife disappeared -- it was n't known how or when.
she just was n't ever seen again, that's all.
whether she died or was murdered or went away nobody ever knew.
there was some talk of an investigation but nothing came of it.
as for the girl, she's always lived there with her father.
she must be a perfect heathen.
he never goes anywhere, but there used to be talk of strangers visiting him -- queer sort of characters who came up the lake in vessels from the american side.
i have n't heard any reports of such these past few years, though -- not since his wife disappeared.
he keeps a yacht and goes sailing in it -- sometimes he cruises about for weeks -- that's about all he ever does.
and now you know as much about the olivers as i do, mr. douglas."
alan had listened to this gossipy narrative with an interest that did not escape isabel king's observant eyes.
much of it he mentally dismissed as improbable surmise, but the basic facts were probably as mrs. danby had reported them.
he had known that the girl of the shore could be no commonplace, primly nurtured young woman.
""has no effort ever been made to bring these people into touch with the church?"
he asked absently.
""bless you, yes.
every minister that's ever been in rexton has had a try at it.
the old cousin met every one of them at the door and told him nobody was at home.
mr. strong was the most persistent -- he did n't like being beaten.
he went again and again and finally the captain sent him word that when he wanted parsons or pill-dosers he'd send for them, and till he did he'd thank them to mind their own business.
they say mr. strong met lynde once along shore and wanted to know if she would n't come to church, and she laughed in his face and told him she knew more about god now than he did or ever would.
perhaps the story is n't true.
or if it was maybe he provoked her into saying it.
mr. strong was n't overly tactful.
i believe in judging the poor girl as charitably as possible and making allowances for her, seeing how she's been brought up.
you could n't expect her to know how to behave."
somehow, alan resented mrs. danby's charity.
then, his sense of humour being strongly developed, he smiled to think of this commonplace old lady "making allowances" for the splendid bit of femininity he had seen on the shore.
a plump barnyard fowl might as well have talked of making allowances for a seagull!
alan walked home with isabel king but he was very silent as they went together down the long, dark, sweet-smelling country road bordered by its white orchards.
isabel put her own construction on his absent replies to her remarks and presently she asked him, "did you think lynde oliver handsome?"
the question gave alan an annoyance out of all proportion to its significance.
he felt an instinctive reluctance to discuss lynde oliver with isabel king.
""i saw her only for a moment," he said coldly, "but she impressed me as being a beautiful woman."
""they tell queer stories about her -- but maybe they're not all true," said isabel, unable to keep the sneer of malice out of her voice.
at that moment alan's secret contempt for her crystallized into pronounced aversion.
he made no reply and they went the rest of the way in silence.
at her gate isabel said, "you have n't been over to see us very lately, mr. douglas."
""my congregation is a large one and i can not visit all my people as often as i might wish," alan answered, all the more coldly for the personal note in her tone.
""a minister's time is not his own, you know."
""shall you be going to see the olivers?"
asked isabel bluntly.
""i have not considered that question.
good-night, miss king."
on his way back to the manse alan did consider the question.
should he make any attempt to establish friendly relations with the residents of four winds?
it surprised him to find how much he wanted to, but he finally concluded that he would not.
they were not adherents of his church and he did not believe that even a minister had any right to force himself upon people who plainly wished to be let alone.
when he got home, although it was late, he went to his study and began work on a new text -- for elder trewin's seemed utterly out of the question.
even with the new one he did not get on very well.
at last in exasperation he leaned back in his chair.
why ca n't i stop thinking of those four winds people?
here, let me put these haunting thoughts into words and see if that will lay them.
that girl had a beautiful face but a cold one.
would i like to see it lighted up with the warmth of her soul set free?
yes, frankly, i would.
she looked upon me with indifference.
would i like to see her welcome me as a friend?
i have a conviction that i would, although no doubt everybody in my congregation would look upon her as a most unsuitable friend for me.
do i believe that she is wild, unwomanly, heathenish, as mrs. danby says?
no, i do not, most emphatically.
i believe she is a lady in the truest sense of that much abused word, though she is doubtless unconventional.
having said all this, i do not see what more there is to be said.
and -- i -- am -- going -- to -- write -- this -- sermon.
alan wrote it, putting all thought of lynde oliver sternly out of his mind for the time being.
he had no notion of falling in love with her.
he knew nothing of love and imagined that it counted for nothing in his life.
he admitted that his curiosity was aflame about the girl, but it never occurred to him that she meant or could mean anything to him but an attractive enigma which once solved would lose its attraction.
the young women he knew in rexton, whose simple, pleasant friendship he valued, had the placid, domestic charm of their own sweet-breathed, windless orchards.
lynde oliver had the fascination of the lake shore -- wild, remote, untamed -- the lure of the wilderness and the primitive.
there was nothing more personal in his thought of her, and yet when he recalled isabel king's sneer he felt an almost personal resentment.
* * * * * during the following fortnight alan made many trips to the shore -- and he always went by the branch road to the four winds point.
he did not attempt to conceal from himself that he hoped to meet lynde oliver again.
in this he was unsuccessful.
sometimes he saw her at a distance along the shore but she always disappeared as soon as seen.
occasionally as he crossed the point he saw her working in her garden but he never went very near the house, feeling that he had no right to spy on it or her in any way.
he soon became convinced that she avoided him purposely and the conviction piqued him.
he felt an odd masterful desire to meet her face to face and make her look at him.
sometimes he called himself a fool and vowed he would go no more to the four winds shore.
yet he inevitably went.
he did not find in the shore the comfort and inspiration he had formerly found.
something had come between his soul and the soul of the wilderness -- something he did not recognize or formulate -- a nameless, haunting longing that shaped itself about the memory of a cold sweet face and starry, indifferent eyes, grey as the lake at dawn.
of captain anthony he never got even a glimpse, but he saw the old cousin several times, going and coming about the yard and its environs.
finally one day he met her, coming up a path which led to a spring down in a firry hollow.
she was carrying two heavy pails of water and alan asked permission to help her.
he half expected a repulse, for the tall, grim old woman had a rather stern and forbidding look, but after gazing at him a moment in a somewhat scrutinizing manner she said briefly, "you may, if you like."
alan took the pails and followed her, the path not being wide enough for two.
she strode on before him at a rapid, vigorous pace until they came out into the yard by the house.
alan felt his heart beating foolishly.
would he see lynde oliver?
would -- "you may carry the water there," the old woman said, pointing to a little outhouse near the pines.
""i'm washing -- the spring water is softer than the well water.
thank you" -- as alan set the pails down on a bench -- "i'm not so young as i was and bringing the water so far tires me.
lynde always brings it for me when she's home."
she stood before him in the narrow doorway, blocking his exit, and looked at him with keen, deep-set dark eyes.
in spite of her withered aspect and wrinkled face, she was not an uncomely old woman and there was about her a dignity of carriage and manner that pleased alan.
it did not occur to him to wonder why it should please him.
if he had hunted that feeling down he might have been surprised to discover that it had its origin in a curious gratification over the thought that the woman who lived with lynde had a certain refinement about her.
he preferred her unsmiling dourness to vulgar garrulity.
""are you the young minister up at rexton?"
she asked bluntly.
""yes."
""i thought so.
lynde said she had seen you on the shore once.
well" -- she cast an uncertain glance over her shoulder at the house -- "i'm much obliged to you."
alan had an idea that that was not what she had thought of saying, but as she had turned aside and was busying herself with the pails, there seemed nothing for him to do but to go.
""wait a moment."
she faced him again, and if alan had been a vain man he might have thought that admiration looked from her piercing eyes.
""what do you think of us?
i suppose they've told you tales of us up there?"
-- with a scornful gesture of her hand in the direction of rexton.
""do you believe them?"
""i believe no ill of anyone until i have absolute proof of it," said alan, smiling -- he was quite unconscious what a winning smile he had, which was the best of it -- "and i never put faith in gossip.
of course you are gossipped about -- you know that."
""yes, i know it" -- grimly -- "and i do n't care what they say about the captain and me.
we are a queer pair -- just as queer as they make us out.
you can believe what you like about us, but do n't you believe a word they say against lynde.
she's sweet and good and beautiful.
it's not her fault that she never went to church -- it's her father's.
do n't you hold that against her."
the fierce yet repressed energy of her tone prevented alan from feeling any amusement over her simple defence of lynde.
moreover, it sounded unreasonably sweet in his ears.
""i wo n't," he promised, "but i do n't suppose it would matter much to miss oliver if i did.
she did not strike me as a young lady who would worry very much about other people's opinions."
if his object were to prolong the conversation about lynde, he was disappointed, for the old woman had turned abruptly to her work again and, though alan lingered for a few moments longer, she took no further notice of him.
but when he had gone she peered stealthily after him from the door until he was lost to sight among the pines.
""a well-looking man," she muttered.
""i wish lynde had been home.
i did n't dare ask him to the house for i knew anthony was in one of his moods.
but it's time something was done.
she's woman grown and this is no life for her.
and there's nobody to do anything but me and i'm not able, even if i knew what to do.
i wonder why she hates men so.
perhaps it's because she never knew any that were real gentlemen.
this man is -- but then he's a minister and that makes a wide gulf between them in another way.
i've seen the love of man and woman bridge some wider gulfs though.
but it ca n't with lynde, i'm fearing.
she's so bitter at the mere speaking of love and marriage.
i ca n't think why.
i'm sure her mother and anthony were happy together, and that was all she's ever seen of marriage.
but i thought when she told me of meeting this young man on the shore there was something in her look i'd never noticed before -- as if she'd found something in herself she'd never known was there.
but she'll never make friends with him and i ca n't.
if the captain was n't so queer --" she stopped abruptly, for a tall lithe figure was coming up from the shore.
lynde waved her hand as she drew near.
""oh, emily, i've had such a splendid sail.
it was glorious.
bad emily, you've been carrying water.
did n't i tell you never to do that when i was away?"
""i did n't have to do it.
that young minister up at rexton met me and brought it up.
he's nice, lynde."
lynde's brow darkened.
she turned and walked away to the house without a word.
on his way home that night alan met isabel king on the main shore road.
she carried an armful of pine boughs and said she wanted the needles for a cushion.
yet the thought came into alan's mind that she was spying on him and, although he tried to dismiss it as unworthy, it continued to lurk there.
for a week he avoided the shore, but there came a day when its inexplicable lure drew him to it again irresistibly.
it was a warm, windy evening and the air was sweet and resinous, the lake misty and blue.
there was no sign of life about four winds and the shore seemed as lonely and virgin as if human foot had never trodden it.
the captain's yacht was gone from the little harbour where it was generally anchored and, though every flutter of wind in the scrub firs made alan's heart beat expectantly, he saw nothing of lynde oliver.
he was on the point of turning homeward, with an unreasoning sense of disappointment, when one of lynde's dogs broke down through the hedge of spruces, barking loudly.
alan looked for lynde to follow, but she did not, and he speedily saw that there was something unusual about the dog's behaviour.
the animal circled around him, still barking excitedly, then ran off for a short distance, stopped, barked again, and returned, repeating the manoeuvre.
it was plain that he wanted alan to follow him, and it occurred to the young minister that the dog's mistress must be in danger of some kind.
instantly he set off after him; and the dog, with a final sharp bark of satisfaction, sprang up the low bank into the spruces.
alan followed him across the peninsula and then along the further shore, which rapidly grew steep and high.
half a mile down the cliffs were rocky and precipitous, while the beach beneath them was heaped with huge boulders.
alan followed the dog along one of the narrow paths with which the barrens abounded until nearly a mile from four winds.
then the animal halted, ran to the edge of the cliff and barked.
it was an ugly-looking place where a portion of the soil had evidently broken away recently, and alan stepped cautiously out to the brink and looked down.
he could not repress an exclamation of dismay and alarm.
a few feet below him lynde oliver was lying on a mass of mossy soil which was apparently on the verge of slipping over a sloping shelf of rock, below which was a sheer drop of thirty feet to the cruel boulders below.
the extreme danger of her position was manifest at a glance; the soil on which she lay was stationary, yet it seemed as if the slightest motion on her part would send it over the brink.
lynde lay movelessly; her face was white, and both fear and appeal were visible in her large dilated eyes.
yet she was quite calm and a faint smile crossed her pale lips as she saw the man and the dog.
""good faithful pat, so you did bring help," she said.
""but how can i help you, miss oliver?"
said alan hoarsely.
""i can not reach you -- and it looks as if the slightest touch or jar would send that broken earth over the brink."
""i fear it would.
you must go back to four winds and get a rope."
""and leave you here alone -- in such danger?"
""pat will stay with me.
besides, there is nothing else to do.
you will find a rope in that little house where you put the water for emily.
father and emily are away.
i think i am quite safe here if i do n't move at all."
alan's own common sense told him that, as she said, there was nothing else to do and, much as he hated to leave her alone thus, he realized that he must lose no time in doing it.
""i'll be back as quickly as possible," he said hurriedly.
alan had been a noted runner at college and his muscles had not forgotten their old training.
yet it seemed to him an age ere he reached four winds, secured the rope, and returned.
at every flying step he was haunted by the thought of the girl lying on the brink of the precipice and the fear that she might slip over it before he could rescue her.
when he reached the scene of the accident he dreaded to look over the broken edge, but she was lying there safely and she smiled when she saw him -- a brave smile that softened her tense white face into the likeness of a frightened child's.
""if i drop the rope down to you, are you strong enough to hold to it while the earth goes and then draw yourself up the slope hand over hand?"
asked alan anxiously.
""yes," she answered fearlessly.
alan passed down one end of the rope and then braced himself firmly to hold it, for there was no tree near enough to be of any assistance.
the next moment the full weight of her body swung from it, for at her first movement the soil beneath her slipped away.
alan's heart sickened; what if she went with it?
could she cling to the rope while he drew her up?
then he saw she was still safe on the sloping shelf.
carefully and painfully she drew herself to her knees and, dinging to the rope, crept up the rock hand over hand.
when she came within his reach he grasped her arms and lifted her up into safety beside him.
""thank god," he said, with whiter lips than her own.
for a few moments lynde sat silent on the sod, exhausted with fright and exertion, while her dog fawned on her in an ecstasy of joy.
finally she looked up into alan's anxious face and their eyes met.
it was something more than the physical reaction that suddenly flushed the girl's cheeks.
she sprang lithely to her feet.
""can you walk back home?"
alan asked.
""oh, yes, i am all right now.
it was very foolish of me to get into such a predicament.
father and emily went down the lake in the yacht this afternoon and i started out for a ramble.
when i came here i saw some junebells growing right out on the ledge and i crept out to gather them.
i should have known better.
it broke away under me and the more i tried to scramble back the faster it slid down, carrying me with it.
i thought it would go right over the brink" -- she gave a little involuntary shudder -- "but just at the very edge it stopped.
i knew i must lie very still or it would go right over.
it seemed like days.
pat was with me and i told him to go for help, but i knew there was no one at home -- and i was horribly afraid," she concluded with another shiver.
""i never was afraid in my life before -- at least not with that kind of fear."
""you have had a terrible experience and a narrow escape," said alan lamely.
he could think of nothing more to say; his usual readiness of utterance seemed to have failed him.
""you saved my life," she said, "you and pat -- for doggie must have his share of credit."
""a much larger share than mine," said alan, smiling.
""if pat had not come for me, i would not have known of your danger.
what a magnificent fellow he is!"
""is n't he?"
she agreed proudly.
""and so is laddie, my other dog.
he went with father today.
i love my dogs more than people."
she looked at him with a little defiance in her eyes.
""i suppose you think that terrible."
""i think many dogs are much more lovable -- and worthy of love -- than many people," said alan, laughing.
how childlike she was in some ways!
that trace of defiance -- it was so like a child who expected to be scolded for some wrong attitude of mind.
and yet there were moments when she looked the tall proud queen.
sometimes, when the path grew narrow, she walked before him, her hand on the dog's head.
alan liked this, since it left him free to watch admiringly the swinging grace of her step and the white curves of her neck beneath the thick braid of hair, which today was wound about her head.
when she dropped back beside him in the wider spaces, he could only have stolen glances at her profile, delicately, strongly cut, virginal in its soft curves, childlike in its purity.
once she looked around and caught his glance; again she flushed, and something strange and exultant stirred in alan's heart.
it was as if that maiden blush were the involuntary, unconscious admission of some power he had over her -- a power which her hitherto unfettered spirit had never before felt.
the cold indifference he had seen in her face at their first meeting was gone, and something told him it was gone forever.
when they came in sight of four winds they saw two people walking up the road from the harbour and a few further steps brought them face to face with captain anthony oliver and his old housekeeper.
the captain's appearance was a fresh surprise to alan.
he had expected to meet a rough, burly sailor, loud of voice and forbidding of manner.
instead, captain anthony was a tall, well-built man of perhaps fifty.
his face, beneath its shock of iron-grey hair, was handsome but wore a somewhat forbidding expression, and there was something in it, apart from line or feature, which did not please alan.
he had no time to analyze this impression, for lynde said hurriedly, "father, this is mr. douglas.
he has just done me a great service."
she briefly explained her accident; when she had finished, the captain turned to alan and held out his hand, a frank smile replacing the rather suspicious and contemptuous scowl which had previously overshadowed it.
""i am much obliged to you, mr. douglas," he said cordially.
""you must come up to the house and let me thank you at leisure.
as a rule i'm not very partial to the cloth, as you may have heard.
in this case it is the man, not the minister, i invite."
the front door of four winds opened directly into a wide, low-ceilinged living room, furnished with simplicity and good taste.
leaving the two men there, lynde and the old cousin vanished, and alan found himself talking freely with the captain who could, as it appeared, talk well on many subjects far removed from four winds.
he was evidently a clever, self-educated man, somewhat opinionated and given to sarcasm; he never made any references to his own past life or experiences, but alan discovered him to be surprisingly well read in politics and science.
sometimes in the pauses of the conversation alan found the older man looking at him in a furtive way he did not like, but the captain was such an improvement on what he had been led to expect that he was not inclined to be over critical.
at least, this was what he honestly thought.
he did not suspect that it was because this man was lynde's father that he wished to think as well as possible of him.
presently lynde came in.
she had changed her outdoor dress, stained with moss and soil in her fall, for a soft clinging garment of some pale yellow material, and her long, thick braid of hair hung over her shoulder.
she sat mutely down in a dim corner and took no part in the conversation except to answer briefly the remarks which alan addressed to her.
emily came in and lighted the lamp on the table.
she was as grim and unsmiling as ever, yet she cast a look of satisfaction on alan as she passed out.
one dog lay down at lynde's feet, the other sat on his haunches by her side and laid his head on her lap.
rexton and its quiet round of parish duties seemed thousands of miles away from alan, and he wondered a little if this were not all a dream.
when he went away the captain invited him back.
""if you like to come, that is," he said brusquely, "and always as the man, not the priest, remember.
i do n't want you by and by to be slyly slipping in the thin end of any professional wedges.
you'll waste your time if you do.
come as man to man and you'll be welcome, for i like you -- and it's few men i like.
but do n't try to talk religion to me."
""i never talk religion," said alan emphatically.
""i try to live it.
i'll not come to your house as a self-appointed missionary, sir, but i shall certainly act and speak at all times as my conscience and my reverence for my vocation demands.
if i respect your beliefs, whatever they may be, i shall expect you to respect mine, captain oliver."
""oh, i wo n't insult your god," said the captain with a faint sneer.
alan went home in a tumult of contending feelings.
he did not altogether like captain anthony -- that was very clear to him, and yet there was something about the man that attracted him.
intellectually he was a worthy foeman, and alan had often longed for such since coming to rexton.
he missed the keen, stimulating debates of his college days and, now there seemed a chance of renewing them, he was eager to grasp it.
and lynde -- how beautiful she was!
what though she shared -- as was not unlikely -- in her father's lack of belief?
she could not be essentially irreligious -- that were impossible in a true woman.
might not this be his opportunity to help her -- to lead her into dearer light?
alan douglas was a sincere man, with himself as well as with others, yet there are some motives that lie, in their first inception, too deep even for the probe of self-analysis.
he had not as yet the faintest suspicion as to the real source of his interest in lynde oliver -- in his sudden forceful desire to be of use and service to her -- to rescue her from spiritual peril as he had that day rescued her from bodily danger.
she must have a lonely, unsatisfying life, he thought.
it is my duty to help her if i can.
it did not then occur to him that duty in this instance wore a much more pleasing aspect than it had sometimes worn in his experience.
* * * * * alan did not mean to be oversoon in going back to four winds, but three days later a book came to him which captain anthony had expressed a wish to see.
it furnished an excuse for an earlier call.
after that he went often.
he always found the captain courteous and affable, old emily grimly cordial, lynde sometimes remote and demure, sometimes frankly friendly.
occasionally, when the captain was away in his yacht, he went for a walk with her and her dogs along the shore or through the sweet-smelling pinelands up the lake.
he found that she loved books and was avid for more of them than she could obtain; he was glad to take her several and discuss them with her.
she liked history and travels best.
with novels she had no patience, she said disdainfully.
she seldom spoke of herself or her past life and alan fancied she avoided any personal reference.
but once she said abruptly, "why do you never ask me to go to church?
i've always been afraid you would."
""because i do not think it would do you any good to go if you did n't want to," said alan gravely.
""souls should not be rudely handled any more than bodies."
she looked at him reflectively, her finger denting her chin in a meditative fashion she had.
""you are not at all like mr. strong.
he always scolded me, when he got a chance, for not going to church.
i would have hated him if it had been worthwhile.
i told him one day that i was nearer to god under these pines than i could be in any building fashioned by human hands.
he was very much shocked.
but i do n't want you to misunderstand me.
father does not go to church because he does not believe there is a god.
but i know there is.
mother taught me so.
i have never gone to church because father would not allow me, and i could not go now in rexton where the people talk about me so.
oh, i know they do -- you know it, too -- but i do not care for them.
i know i'm not like other girls.
i would like to be but i ca n't be -- i never can be -- now."
there was some strange passion in her voice that alan did not quite understand -- a bitterness and a revolt which he took to be against the circumstances that hedged her in.
""is not some other life possible for you if your present life does not content you?"
he said gently.
""but it does content me," said lynde imperiously.
""i want no other -- i wish this life to go on forever -- forever, do you understand?
if i were sure that it would -- if i were sure that no change would ever come to me, i would be perfectly content.
it is the fear that a change will come that makes me wretched.
oh!"
she shuddered and put her hands over her eyes.
alan thought she must mean that when her father died she would be alone in the world.
he wanted to comfort her -- reassure her -- but he did not know how.
one evening when he went to four winds he found the door open and, seeing the captain in the living room, he stepped in unannounced.
captain anthony was sitting by the table, his head in his hands; at alan's entrance he turned upon him a haggard face, blackened by a furious scowl beneath which blazed eyes full of malevolence.
""what do you want here?"
he said, following up the demand with a string of vile oaths.
before alan could summon his scattered wits, lynde glided in with a white, appealing face.
wordlessly she grasped alan's arm, drew him out, and shut the door.
""oh, i've been watching for you," she said breathlessly.
""i was afraid you might come tonight -- but i missed you."
""but your father?"
said alan in amazement.
""how have i angered him?"
""hush.
come into the garden.
i will explain there."
he followed her into the little enclosure where the red and white roses were now in full blow.
""father is n't angry with you," said lynde in a low shamed voice.
""it's just -- he takes strange moods sometimes.
then he seems to hate us all -- even me -- and he is like that for days.
he seems to suspect and dread everybody as if they were plotting against him.
you -- perhaps you think he has been drinking?
no, that is not the trouble.
these terrible moods come on without any cause that we know of.
even mother could not do anything with him when he was like that.
you must go away now -- and do not come back until his dark mood has passed.
he will be just as glad to see you as ever then, and this will not make any difference with him.
do n't come back for a week at least."
""i do not like to leave you in such trouble, miss oliver."
""oh, it does n't matter about me -- i have emily.
and there is nothing you could do.
please go at once.
father knows i am talking to you and that will vex him still more."
alan, realizing that he could not help her and that his presence only made matters worse, went away perplexedly.
the following week was a miserable one for him.
his duties were distasteful to him and meeting his people a positive torture.
sometimes mrs. danby looked dubiously at him and seemed on the point of saying something -- but never said it.
isabel king watched him when they met, with bold probing eyes.
in his abstraction he did not notice this any more than he noticed a certain subtle change which had come over the members of his congregation -- as if a breath of suspicion had blown across them and troubled their confidence and trust.
once alan would have been keenly and instantly conscious of this slight chill; now he was not even aware of it.
when he ventured to go back to four winds he found the captain on the point of starting off for a cruise in his yacht.
he was urbane and friendly, utterly ignoring the incident of alan's last visit and regretting that business compelled him to go down the lake.
alan saw him off with small regret and turned joyfully to lynde, who was walking under the pines with her dogs.
she looked pale and tired and her eyes were still troubled, but she smiled proudly and made no reference to what had happened.
""i'm going to put these flowers on mother's grave," she said, lifting her slender hands filled with late white roses.
""mother loved flowers and i always keep them near her when i can.
you may come with me if you like."
alan had known lynde's mother was buried under the pines but he had never visited the spot before.
the grave was at the westernmost end of the pine wood, where it gave out on the lake, a beautiful spot, given over to silence and shadow.
""mother wished to be buried here," lynde said, kneeling to arrange her flowers.
""father would have taken her anywhere but she said she wanted to be near us and near the lake she had loved so well.
father buried her himself.
he would n't have anyone else do anything for her.
i am so glad she is here.
it would have been terrible to have seen her taken far away -- my sweet little mother."
""a mother is the best thing in the world -- i realized that when i lost mine," said alan gently.
""how long is it since your mother died?"
""three years.
oh, i thought i should die too when she did.
she was very ill -- she was never strong, you know -- but i never thought she could die.
there was a year then -- part of the time i did n't believe in god at all and the rest i hated him.
i was very wicked but i was so unhappy.
father had so many dreadful moods and -- there was something else.
i used to wish to die."
she bowed her head on her hands and gazed moodily on the ground.
alan, leaning against a pine tree, looked down at her.
the sunlight fell through the swaying boughs on her glory of burnished hair and lighted up the curve of cheek and chin against the dark background of wood brown.
all the defiance and wildness had gone from her for the time and she seemed like a helpless, weary child.
he wanted to take her in his arms and comfort her.
""you must resemble your mother," he said absently, as if thinking aloud.
""you do n't look at all like your father."
lynde shook her head.
""no, i do n't look like mother either.
she was tiny and dark -- she had a sweet little face and velvet-brown eyes and soft curly dark hair.
oh, i remember her look so well.
i wish i did resemble her.
i loved her so -- i would have done anything to save her suffering and trouble.
at least, she died in peace."
there was a curious note of fierce self-gratulation in the girl's voice as she spoke the last sentence.
again alan felt the unpleasant impression that there was much in her that he did not understand -- might never understand -- although such understanding was necessary to perfect friendship.
she had never spoken so freely of her past life to him before, yet he felt somehow that something was being kept back in jealous repression.
it must be something connected with her father, alan thought.
doubtless, captain anthony's past would not bear inspection, and his daughter knew it and dwelt in the shadow of her knowledge.
his heart filled with aching pity for her; he raged secretly because he was so powerless to help her.
her girlhood had been blighted, robbed of its meed of happiness and joy.
was she likewise to miss her womanhood?
alan's hands clenched involuntarily at the unuttered question.
on his way home that evening he again met isabel king.
she turned and walked back with him but she made no reference to four winds or its inhabitants.
if alan had troubled himself to look, he would have seen a malicious glow in her baleful brown eyes.
but the only eyes which had any meaning for him just then were the grey ones of lynde oliver.
* * * * * during alan's next three visits to four winds he saw nothing of lynde, either in the house or out of it.
this surprised and worried him.
there was no apparent difference in captain anthony, who continued to be suave and friendly.
alan always enjoyed his conversations with the captain, who was witty, incisive, and pungent; yet he disliked the man himself more at every visit.
if he had been compelled to define his impression, he would have said the captain was a charming scoundrel.
but it occurred to him that emily was disturbed about something.
sometimes he caught her glance, full of perplexity and -- it almost seemed -- distrust.
she looked as if she felt hostile towards him.
but alan dismissed the idea as absurd.
she had been friendly from the first and he had done nothing to excite her disapproval.
lynde's mysterious absence was a far more perplexing problem.
she had not gone away, for when alan asked the captain concerning her, he responded indifferently that she was out walking.
alan caught a glint of amusement in the older man's eyes as he spoke.
he could have sworn it was malicious amusement.
one evening he went to four winds around the shore.
as he turned the headland of the cove, he saw lynde and her dogs not a hundred feet away.
the moment she saw him she darted up the bank and disappeared among the firs.
alan was thunderstruck.
there was no room for doubt that she meant to avoid him.
he walked up to the house in a tumult of mingled feelings which he did not even then understand.
he only realized that he felt bitterly hurt and grieved -- puzzled as well.
what did it all mean?
he met emily in the yard of four winds on her way to the spring and stopped her resolutely.
""miss oliver," he said bluntly, "is miss lynde angry with me?
and why?"
emily looked at him piercingly.
""have you no idea why?"
she asked shortly.
""none in the world."
she looked at him through and through a moment longer.
then, seeming satisfied with her scrutiny, she picked up her pail.
""come down to the spring with me," she said.
as soon as they were out of sight of the house, emily began abruptly.
""if you do n't know why lynde is acting so, i ca n't tell you, for i do n't know either.
i do n't even know if she is angry.
i only thought perhaps she was -- that you had done or said something to vex her -- plaguing her to go to church maybe.
but if you did n't, it may not be anger at all.
i do n't understand that girl.
she's been different ever since her mother died.
she used to tell me everything before that.
you must go and ask her right out yourself what is wrong.
but maybe i can tell you something.
did you write her a letter a fortnight ago?"
""a letter?
no."
""well, she got one then.
i thought it came from you -- i did n't know who else would be writing to her.
a boy brought it and gave it to her at the door.
she's been acting strange ever since.
she cries at night -- something lynde never did before except when her mother died.
and in daytime she roams the shore and woods like one possessed.
you must find out what was in that letter, mr. douglas."
""have you any idea who the boy was?"
alan asked, feeling somewhat relieved.
the mystery was clearing up, he thought.
no doubt it was the old story of some cowardly anonymous letter.
his thoughts flew involuntarily to isabel king.
emily shook her head.
""no.
he was just a half-grown fellow with reddish hair and he limped a little."
""oh, that is the postmaster's son," said alan disappointedly.
""that puts us further off the scent than ever.
the letter was probably dropped in the box at the office and there will consequently be no way of tracing the writer."
""well, i ca n't tell you anything more," said emily.
""you'll have to ask lynde for the truth."
this alan was determined to do whenever he should meet her.
he did not go to the house with emily but wandered about the shore, watching for lynde and not seeing her.
at length he went home, a prey to stormy emotions.
he realized at last that he loved lynde oliver.
he wondered how he could have been so long blind to it.
he knew that he must have loved her ever since he had first seen her.
the discovery amazed but did not shock him.
there was no reason why he should not love her -- should not woo and win her for his wife if she cared for him.
she was good and sweet and true.
anything of doubt in her antecedents could not touch her.
probably the world would look upon captain anthony as a somewhat undesirable father-in-law for a minister, but that aspect of the question did not disturb alan.
as for the trouble of the letter, he felt sure he would easily be able to clear it away.
probably some malicious busybody had become aware of his frequent calls at four winds and chose to interfere in his private affairs thus.
for the first time it occurred to him that there had been a certain lack of cordiality among his people of late.
if it were really so, doubtless this was the reason.
at any other time this would have been of moment to him.
but now his thoughts were too wholly taken up with lynde and the estrangement on her part to attach much importance to anything else.
what she thought mattered incalculably more to alan than what all the people in rexton put together thought.
he had the right, like any other man, to woo the woman of his choice and he would certainly brook no outside interference in the matter.
after a sleepless night he went back to four winds in the morning.
lynde would not expect him at that time and he would have more chance of finding her.
the result justified his idea, for he met her by the spring.
alan felt shocked at the change in her appearance.
she looked as if years of suffering had passed over her.
her lips were pallid, and hollow circles under her eyes made them appear unnaturally large.
he had last left the girl in the bloom of her youth; he found her again a woman on whom life had laid its heavy hand.
a burning flood of colour swept over her face as they met, then receded as quickly, leaving her whiter than before.
without any waste of words, alan plunged abruptly into the subject.
""miss oliver, why have you avoided me so of late?
have i done anything to offend you?"
""no."
she spoke as if the word hurt her, her eyes persistently cast down.
""then what is the trouble?"
there was no answer.
she gave an unvoluntary glance around as if seeking some way of escape.
there was none, for the spring was set about with thick young firs and alan blocked the only path.
he leaned forward and took her hands in his.
""miss oliver, you must tell me what the trouble is," he said firmly.
she pulled her hands away and flung them up to her face, her form shaken by stormy sobs.
in distress he put his arm about her and drew her closer.
""tell me, lynde," he whispered tenderly.
she broke away from him, saying passionately, "you must not come to four winds any more.
you must not have anything more to do with us -- any of us.
we have done you enough harm already.
but i never thought it could hurt you -- oh, i am sorry, sorry!"
""miss oliver, i want to see that letter you received the other evening.
oh" -- as she started with surprise -- "i know about it -- emily told me.
who wrote it?"
""there was no name signed to it," she faltered.
""just as i thought.
well, you must let me see it."
""i can not -- i burned it."
""then tell me what was in it.
you must.
this matter must be cleared up -- i am not going to have our beautiful friendship spoiled by the malice of some coward.
what did that letter say?"
""it said that everybody in your congregation was talking about your frequent visits here -- that it had made a great scandal -- that it was doing you a great deal of injury and would probably end in your having to leave rexton."
""that would be a catastrophe indeed," said alan drily.
""well, what else?"
""nothing more -- at least, nothing about you.
the rest was about myself -- i did not mind it -- much.
but i was so sorry to think that i had done you harm.
it is not too late to undo it.
you must not come here any more.
then they will forget."
""perhaps -- but i should not forget.
it's a little too late for me.
lynde, you must not let this venomous letter come between us.
i love you, dear -- i've loved you ever since i met you and i want you for my wife."
alan had not intended to say that just then, but the words came to his lips in spite of himself.
she looked so sad and appealing and weary that he wanted to have the right to comfort and protect her.
she turned her eyes full upon him with no hint of maidenly shyness or shrinking in them.
instead, they were full of a blank, incredulous horror that swallowed up every other feeling.
there was no mistaking their expression and it struck an icy chill to alan's heart.
he had certainly not expected a too ready response on her part -- he knew that even if she cared for him he might find it a matter of time to win her avowal of it -- but he certainly had not expected to see such evident abject dismay as her blanched face betrayed.
she put up her hand as if warding a blow.
""do n't -- do n't," she gasped.
""you must not say that -- you must never say it.
oh, i never dreamed of this.
if i had thought it possible you could -- love me, i would never have been friends with you.
oh, i've made a terrible mistake."
she wrung her hands piteously together, looking like a soul in torment.
alan could not bear to see her pain.
""do n't feel such distress," he implored.
""i suppose i've spoken too abruptly -- but i'll be so patient, dear, if you'll only try to care for me a little.
ca n't you, dear?"
""i ca n't marry you," said lynde desperately.
she leaned against a slim white bole of a young birch behind her and looked at him wretchedly.
""wo n't you please go away and forget me?"
""i ca n't forget you," alan said, smiling a little in spite of his suffering.
""you are the only woman i can ever love -- and i ca n't give you up unless i have to.
wo n't you be frank with me, dear?
do you honestly think you can never learn to love me?"
""it is not that," said lynde in a hard, unnatural voice.
""i am married already."
alan stared at her, not in the least comprehending the meaning of her words.
everything -- pain, hope, fear, passion -- had slipped away from him for a moment, as if he had been stunned by a physical blow.
he could not have heard aright.
""married?"
he said dully.
""lynde, you can not mean it?"
""yes, i do.
i was married three years ago."
""why was i not told this?"
alan's voice was stern, although he did not mean it to be so, and she shrank and shivered.
then she began in a low monotonous tone from which all feeling of any sort seemed to have utterly faded.
""three years ago mother was very ill -- so ill that any shock would kill her, so the doctor father brought from the lake told us.
a man -- a young sea captain -- came here to see father.
his name was frank harmon and he had known father well in the past.
they had sailed together.
father seemed to be afraid of him -- i had never seen him afraid of anybody before.
i could not think much about anybody except mother then, but i knew i did not quite like captain harmon, although he was very polite to me and i suppose might have been called handsome.
one day father came to me and told me i must marry captain harmon.
i laughed at the idea at first but when i looked at father's face i did not laugh.
it was all white and drawn.
he implored me to marry captain harmon.
he said if i did not it would mean shame and disgrace for us all -- that captain harmon had some hold on him and would tell what he knew if i did not marry him.
i do n't know what it was but it must have been something dreadful.
and he said it would kill mother.
i knew it would, and that was what drove me to consent at last.
oh, i ca n't tell you what i suffered.
i was only seventeen and there was nobody to advise me.
one day father and captain harmon and i went down the lake to crosse harbour and we were married there.
as soon as the ceremony was over, captain harmon had to sail in his vessel.
he was going to china.
father and i came back home.
nobody knew -- not even emily.
he said we must not tell mother until she was better.
but she was never better.
she only lived three months more -- she lived them happily and at rest.
when i think of that, i am not sorry for what i did.
captain harmon said he would be back in the fall to claim me.
i waited, sick at heart.
but he did not come -- he has never come.
we have never heard a word of or about him since.
sometimes i feel sure he can not be still living.
but never a day dawns that i do n't say to myself, "perhaps he will come today" -- and, oh --" she broke down again, sobbing bitterly.
amid all the daze of his own pain alan realized that, at any cost, he must not make it harder for her by showing his suffering.
he tried to speak calmly, wisely, as a disinterested friend.
""could it not be discovered whether your -- this man -- is or is not living?
surely your father could find out."
lynde shook her head.
""no, he says he has no way of doing so.
we do not know if captain harmon had any relatives or even where his home was, and it was his own ship in which he sailed.
father would be glad to think that frank harmon was dead, but he does not think he is.
he says he was always a fickle-minded fellow, one fancy driving another out of his mind.
oh, i can bear my own misery -- but to think what i have brought on you!
i never dreamed that you could care for me.
i was so lonely and your friendship was so pleasant -- can you ever forgive me?"
""there is nothing to forgive, as far as you are concerned, lynde," said alan steadily.
""you have done me no wrong.
i have loved you sincerely and such love can be nothing but a blessing to me.
i only wish that i could help you.
it wrings my heart to think of your position.
but i can do nothing -- nothing.
i must not even come here any more.
you understand that?"
""yes."
there was an unconscious revelation in the girl's mournful eyes as she turned them on alan.
it thrilled him to the core of his being.
she loved him.
if it were not for that empty marriage form, he could win her, but the knowledge was only an added mocking torment.
alan had not known a man could endure such misery and live.
a score of wild questions rushed to his lips but he crushed them back for lynde's sake and held out his hand.
""good-bye, dear," he said almost steadily, daring to say no more lest he should say too much.
""good-bye," lynde answered faintly.
when he had gone she flung herself down on the moss by the spring and lay there in an utter abandonment of misery and desolation.
pain and indignation struggled for mastery in alan's stormy soul as he walked homeward.
so this was captain anthony's doings!
he had sacrificed his daughter to some crime of his dubious past.
alan never dreamed of blaming lynde for having kept her marriage a secret; he put the blame where it belonged -- on the captain's shoulders.
captain anthony had never warned him by so much as a hint that lynde was not free to be won.
it had all probably seemed a good joke to him.
alan thought the furtive amusement he had so often detected in the captain's eyes was explained now.
he found elder trewin in his study when he got home.
the good elder's face was stern and anxious; he had called on a distasteful errand -- to tell the young minister of the scandal his intimacy with the four winds people was making in the congregation and remonstrate with him concerning it.
alan listened absently, with none of the resentment he would have felt at the interference a day previously.
a man does not mind a pin-prick when a limb is being wrenched away.
""i can promise you that my objectionable calls at four winds will cease," he said sarcastically, when the elder had finished.
elder trewin got himself away, feeling snubbed but relieved.
""took it purty quiet," he reflected.
""do n't believe there was much in the yarns after all.
isabel king started them and probably she exaggerated a lot.
i suppose he's had some notion like as not of bringing the captain over to the church.
but that's foolish, for he'd never manage it, and meanwhile was giving occasion for gossip.
it's just as well to stop it.
he's a good pastor and he works hard -- too hard, mebbe.
he looked real careworn and worried today."
the rexton gossip soon ceased with the cessation of the young minister's visits to four winds.
a month later it suffered a brief revival when a tall grim-faced old woman, whom a few recognized as captain anthony's housekeeper, was seen to walk down the rexton road and enter the manse.
she did not stay there long -- watchers from a dozen different windows were agreed upon that -- and nobody, not even mrs. danby, who did her best to find out, ever knew why she had called.
emily looked at alan with grim reproach when she was shown into his study, and as soon as they were alone she began with her usual abruptness, "mr. douglas, why have you given up coming to four winds?"
alan flinched.
""you must ask lynde that, miss oliver," he said quietly.
""i have asked her -- and she says nothing."
""then i can not tell you."
anger glowed in emily's eyes.
""i thought you were a gentleman," she said bitterly.
""you are not.
you are breaking lynde's heart.
she's gone to a shadow of herself and she's fretting night and day.
you went there and made her like you -- oh, i've eyes -- and then you left her."
alan bent over his desk and looked the old woman in the face unflinchingly.
""you are mistaken, miss oliver," he said earnestly.
""i love lynde and would be only too happy if it were possible that i could marry her.
i am not to blame for what has come about -- she will tell you that herself if you ask her."
his look and tone convinced emily.
""who is to blame then?
lynde herself?"
""no, no."
""the captain then?"
""not in the sense you mean.
i can tell you nothing more."
a baffled expression crossed the old woman's face.
""there's a mystery here -- there always has been -- and i'm shut out of it.
lynde wo n't confide in me -- in me who'd give my life's blood to help her.
perhaps i can help her -- i could tell you something.
have you stopped coming to four winds -- has she made you stop coming -- because she's got such a wicked old scamp for a father?
is that the reason?"
alan shook his head.
""no, that has nothing to do with it."
""and you wo n't come back?"
""it is not a question of will.
i can not -- must not go."
""lynde will break her heart then," said emily in a tone of despair.
""i think not.
she is too strong and fine for that.
help her all you can with sympathy but do n't torment her with any questions.
you may tell her if you like that i advise her to confide the whole story to you, but if she can not do n't tease her to.
be very gentle with her."
""you do n't need to tell me that.
i'd rather die than hurt her.
i came here full of anger against you -- but i see now you are not to blame.
you are suffering too -- your face tells that.
all the same, i wish you'd never set foot in four winds.
she was n't happy before but she was n't so miserable as she is now.
oh, i know anthony is at the bottom of it all in some way but i wo n't ask you any more questions since you do n't feel free to answer them.
but are you sure that nothing can be done to clear up the trouble?"
""too sure," said alan's white lips.
* * * * * the autumn dragged away.
alan found out how much a man may suffer and yet go on living and working.
as for that, his work was all that made life possible for him now and he flung himself into it with feverish energy, growing so thin and hollow-eyed over it that even elder trewin remonstrated and suggested a vacation -- a suggestion at which alan merely smiled.
a vacation which would take him away from lynde's neighbourhood -- the thought was not to be entertained.
he never saw lynde, for he never went to any part of the shore now; yet he hungered constantly for the sight of her, the sound of her voice, the glance of her luminous eyes.
when he pictured her eating her heart out in the solitude of four winds, he clenched his hands in despair.
as for the possibility of harmon's return, alan could never face it for a moment.
when it thrust its ugly presence into his thoughts, he put it away desperately.
the man was dead -- or his fickle fancy had veered elsewhere.
nothing else could explain his absence.
but they could never know, and the uncertainty would forever stand between him and lynde like a spectre.
but he thought more of lynde's pain than his own.
he would have elected to bear any suffering if by so doing he could have freed her from the nightmare dread of harmon's returning to claim her.
that dread had always hung over her and now it must be intensified to agony by her love for another man.
and he could do nothing -- nothing.
he groaned aloud in his helplessness.
one evening in late november alan flung aside his pen and yielded to the impulse that urged him to the lake shore.
he did not mean to seek lynde -- he would go to a part of the shore where there would be no likelihood of meeting her.
but get away by himself he must.
a november storm was raging and there would be a certain satisfaction in breasting its buffets and fighting his way through it.
besides, he knew that isabel king was in the house and he dreaded meeting her.
since his conviction that she had written that letter to lynde, he could not tolerate the girl and it tasked his self-control to keep from showing his contempt openly.
perhaps isabel felt it beneath all his outward courtesy.
at least she did not seek his society as she had formerly done.
it was the second day of the storm; a wild northeast gale was blowing and cold rain and freezing sleet fell in frequent showers.
alan shivered as he came out into its full fury on the lake shore.
at first he could not see the water through the driving mist.
then it cleared away for a moment and he stopped short, aghast at the sight which met his eyes.
opposite him was a long low island known as philip's point, dwindling down at its northeastern side to two long narrow bars of quicksand.
alan's horrified eyes saw a small schooner sunk between the bars; her hull was entirely under water and in the rigging clung one solitary figure.
so much he saw before the point was blotted out in a renewed downpour of sleet.
without a moment's hesitation alan turned and ran for four winds, which was only about a quarter of a mile away around a headland.
with the captain's assistance, something might be done.
other help could not be obtained before darkness would fall and then it would be impossible to do anything.
he dashed up the steps of four winds and met emily, who had flung the door open.
behind her was lynde's pale face with its alarmed questioning eyes.
""where is the captain?"
gasped alan.
""there's a vessel on philip's point and one man at least on her."
""the captain's away on a cruise," said emily blankly.
""he went three days ago."
""then nothing can be done," said alan despairingly.
""it will be dark long before i can get to the village."
lynde stepped out, tying a shawl around her head.
""let us go around to the point," she said.
""have you matches?
no?
emily, get some.
we must light a bonfire at least.
and bring father's glass."
""it is not a fit night for you to be out," said alan anxiously.
""you are sheltered here -- you do n't feel it -- but it's a fearful storm down there."
""i am not afraid of the storm.
it will not hurt me.
let us hurry.
it is growing dark already."
in silence they breasted their way to the shore and around the headland.
arriving opposite philip's point, a lull in the sleet permitted them to see the sunken schooner and the clinging figure.
lynde waved her hand to him and they saw him wave back.
""it wo n't be necessary to light a fire now that he has seen us," said lynde.
""nothing can be done with village help till morning and that man can never cling there so long.
he will freeze to death, for it is growing colder every minute.
his only chance is to swim ashore if he can swim.
the danger will be when he comes near shore; the undertow of the backwater on the quicksand will sweep him away and in his probably exhausted condition he may not be able to make head against it."
""he knows that, doubtless, and that is why he has n't attempted to swim ashore before this," said alan.
""but i'll meet him in the backwater and drag him in."
""you -- you'll risk your own life," cried lynde.
""there is a little risk certainly, but i do n't think there is a great one.
anyhow, the attempt must be made," said alan quietly.
suddenly lynde's composure forsook her.
she wrung her hands.
""i ca n't let you do it," she cried wildly.
""you might be drowned -- there's every risk.
you do n't know the force of that backwater.
alan, alan, do n't think of it."
she caught his arm in her white wet hands and looked into his face with passionate pleading.
emily, who had said nothing, now spoke harshly.
""lynde is right, mr. douglas.
you have no right to risk your life for a stranger.
my advice is to go to the village for help, and lynde and i will make a fire and watch here.
that is all that can be expected of you or us."
alan paid no heed to emily.
very tenderly he loosened lynde's hold on his arm and looked into her quivering face.
""you know it is my duty, lynde," he said gently.
""if anything can be done for that poor man, i am the only one who can do it.
i will come back safe, please god.
be brave, dear."
lynde, with a little moan of resignation, turned away.
old emily looked on with a face of grim disapproval as alan waded out into the surf that boiled and swirled around him in a mad whirl of foam.
the shower of sleet had again slackened, and the wreck half a mile away, with its solitary figure, was dearly visible.
alan beckoned to the man to jump overboard and swim ashore, enforcing his appeal by gestures that commanded haste before the next shower should come.
for a few moments it seemed as if the seaman did not understand or lacked the courage or power to obey.
the next minute he had dropped from the rigging on the crest of a mighty wave and was being borne onward to the shore.
speedily the backwater was reached and the man, sucked down by the swirl of the wave, threw up his arms and disappeared.
alan dashed in, groping, swimming; it seemed an eternity before his hand clutched the drowning man and wrenched him from the undertow.
and, with the seaman in his arms, he staggered back through the foam and dropped his burden on the sand at lynde's feet.
alan was reeling from exhaustion and chilled to the marrow, but he thought only of the man he had rescued.
the latter was unconscious and, as alan bent over him, he heard lynde give a choking little cry.
""he is living still," said alan.
""we must get him up to the house as soon as possible.
how shall we manage it?"
""lynde and i can go and bring the captain's mattress down," said emily.
now that alan was safe she was eager to do all she could.
""then you and i can carry him up to the house."
""that will be best," said alan.
""go quickly."
he did not look at lynde or he would have been shocked by the agony on her face.
she cast one glance at the prostrate man and followed emily.
in a short time they returned with the mattress, and alan and emily carried the sailor on it to four winds.
lynde walked behind them, seemingly unconscious of both.
she watched the stranger's face as one fascinated.
at four winds they carried the man to a room where emily and alan worked over him, while lynde heated water and hunted out stimulants in a mechanical fashion.
when alan came down she asked no questions but looked at him with the same strained horror on her face which it had borne ever since alan had dropped his burden at her feet.
""is he -- conscious?"
asked lynde, as if she forced herself to ask the question.
""yes, he has come back to life.
but he is delirious and does n't realize his surroundings at all.
he thinks he is still on board the vessel.
he'll probably come round all right.
emily is going to watch him and i'll go up to rexton and send dr. ames down."
""do you know who that man you have saved is?"
asked lynde.
""no.
i asked him his name but could not get any sensible answer."
""i can tell you who he is -- he is frank harmon."
alan stared at her.
""frank harmon.
your -- your -- the man you married?
impossible!"
""it is he.
do you think i could be mistaken?"
* * * * * dr. ames came to four winds that night and again the next day.
he found harmon delirious in a high fever.
""it will be several days before he comes to his senses," he said.
""shall i send you help to nurse him?"
""it is n't necessary," said emily stiffly.
""i can look after him -- and the captain ought to be back tomorrow."
""you've no idea who he is, i suppose?"
asked the doctor.
""no."
emily was quite sincere.
lynde had not told her, and emily did not recognize him.
""well, mr. douglas did a brave thing in rescuing him," said dr. ames.
""i'll be back tomorrow."
harmon remained delirious for a week.
alan went every day to four winds, his interest in a man he had rescued explaining his visits to the rexton people.
the captain had returned and, though not absolutely uncivil, was taciturn and moody.
alan reflected grimly that captain anthony probably owed him a grudge for saving harmon's life.
he never saw lynde alone, but her strained, tortured face made his heart ache.
old emily only seemed her natural self.
she waited on harmon and dr. ames considered her a paragon of a nurse.
alan thought it was well that emily knew nothing more of harmon than that he was an old friend of captain anthony's.
he felt sure that she would have walked out of the sick room and never reentered it had she guessed that the patient was the man whom, above all others, lynde dreaded and feared.
one afternoon when alan went to four winds emily met him at the door.
""he's better," she announced.
""he had a good sleep this afternoon and when he woke he was quite himself.
you'd better go up and see him.
i told him all i could but he wants to see you.
anthony and lynde are away to crosse harbour.
go up and talk to him."
harmon turned his head as the minister approached and held out his hand with a smile.
""you're the preacher, i reckon.
they tell me you were the man who pulled me out of that hurly-burly.
i was n't hardly worth saving but i'm as grateful to you as if i was."
""i only -- did -- what any man would have done," said alan, taking the offered hand.
""i do n't know about that.
anyhow, it's not every man could have done it.
i'd been hanging in that rigging all day and most of the night before.
there were five more of us but they dropped off.
i knew it was no use to try to swim ashore alone -- the backwater would be too much for me.
i must have been a lot of trouble.
that old woman says i've been raving for a week.
and, by the way i feel, i fancy i'll be stretched out here another week before i'll be able to use my pins.
who are these olivers anyhow?
the old woman would n't talk about the family."
""do n't you know them?"
asked alan in astonishment.
""is n't your name harmon?"
""that's right -- harmon -- alfred harmon, first mate of the schooner, annie m." "alfred!
i thought your name was frank!"
""frank was my twin brother.
we were so much alike our own mammy could n't tell us apart.
did you know frank?"
""no.
this family did.
miss oliver thought you were frank when she saw you."
""i do n't feel much like myself but i'm not frank anyway.
he's dead, poor chap -- got shot in a spat with chinese pirates three years ago."
""dead!
man, are you speaking the truth?
are you certain?"
""pop sure.
his mate told me the whole story.
say, preacher, what's the matter?
you look as if you were going to keel over."
alan hastily drank a glass of water.
""i -- i am all right now.
i have n't been feeling well of late."
""guess you did n't do yourself any good going out into that freezing water and dragging me in."
""i shall thank god every day of my life that i did do it," said alan gravely, new light in his eyes, as emily entered the room.
""miss oliver, when will the captain and lynde be back?"
""they said they would be home by four."
she looked at alan curiously.
""i will go and meet her," he said quickly.
he came upon lynde, sitting on a grey boulder under the shadow of an overhanging fir coppice, with her dogs beside her.
she turned her head indifferently as alan's footsteps sounded on the pebbles, and then stood slowly up.
""are you looking for me?"
she asked.
""i have some news for you, lynde," alan said.
""has he -- has he come to himself?"
she whispered.
""yes, he has come to himself.
lynde, he is not frank harmon -- he is his twin brother.
he says frank harmon was killed three years ago in the china seas."
for a moment lynde's great grey eyes stared into alan's, questioning.
then, as the truth seized on her comprehension, she sat down on the boulder and put her hands over her face without a word.
alan walked down to the water's edge to give her time to recover herself.
when he came back he took her hands and said quietly, "lynde, do you realize what this means for us -- for us?
you are free -- free to love me -- to be my wife."
lynde shook her head.
""oh, that ca n't be.
i am not fit to be your wife."
""do n't talk nonsense, dear," he smiled.
""it is n't nonsense.
you are a minister and it would ruin you to marry a girl like me.
think what the rexton people would say of it."
""rexton is n't the world, dearest.
last week i had a letter from home asking me to go to a church there.
i did not think of accepting then -- now i will go -- we will both go -- and a new life will begin for you, clear of the shadows of the old."
""that is n't possible.
no, alan, listen -- i love you too well to do you the wrong of marrying you.
it would injure you.
there is father.
i love him and he has always been very kind to me.
but -- but -- there's something wrong -- you know it -- some crime in his past --" "the only man who knew that is dead."
""we do not know that he was the only man.
i am the daughter of a criminal and i am no fit wife for alan douglas.
no, alan, do n't plead, please.
i wo n't think differently -- i never can."
there was a ring of finality in her tone that struck dismay to alan's heart.
he prepared to entreat and argue, but before he could utter a word, the boughs behind them parted and captain anthony stepped down from the bank.
""i've been listening," he announced coolly, "and i think it high time i took a share in the conversation.
you seem to have run up against a snag, mr. douglas.
you say frank harmon is dead.
that's good riddance if it's true.
is it true?"
""his brother declares it is."
""well, then, i'll help you all i can.
i like you, mr. douglas, and i happen to be fond of lynde, too -- though you may n't believe it.
i'm fond of her for her mother's sake and i'd like to see her happy.
i did n't want to give her to harmon that time three years ago but i could n't help myself.
he had the upper hand, curse him.
it was n't for my own sake, though -- it was for my wife's.
however, that's all over and done with and i'll do the best i can to atone for it.
so you wo n't marry your minister because your father was not a good man, lynde?
well, i do n't suppose he was a very good man -- a man who makes his wife's life a hell, even in a refined way, is n't exactly a saint, to my way of thinking.
but that's the worst that could be said of him and it does n't entail any indelible disgrace on his family, i suppose.
i am not your father, lynde."
""not my father?"
lynde echoed the words blankly.
""no.
your father was your mother's first husband.
she never told you of him.
when i said he made her life a hell, i said the truth, no more, no less.
i had loved your mother ever since i was a boy, lynde.
but she was far above me in station and i never dreamed it was possible to win her love.
she married james ashley.
he was a gentleman, so called -- and he did n't kick or beat her.
oh no, he just tormented her refined womanhood to the verge of frenzy, that was all.
he died when you were a baby.
and a year later i found out your mother could love me, rough sailor and all as i was.
i married her and brought her here.
we had fifteen years of happiness together.
i'm not a good man -- but i made your mother happy in spite of her wrecked health and her dark memories.
it was her wish that you should be known as my daughter, but under the present circumstances i know she would wish that you should be told the truth.
marry your man, lynde, and go away with him.
emily will go with you if you like.
i'm going back to the sea.
i've been hankering for it ever since your mother died.
i'll go out of your life.
there, do n't cry -- i hate to see a woman cry.
mr. douglas, i'll leave you to dry her tears and i'll go up to the house and have a talk with harmon."
when captain anthony had disappeared behind the point, alan turned to lynde.
she was sobbing softly and her face was wet with tears.
alan drew her head down on his shoulder.
""sweetheart, the dark past is all put by.
our future begins with promise.
all is well with us, dear lynde."
like a child, she put her arms about his neck and their lips met.
marcella's reward dr. clark shook his head gravely.
""she is not improving as fast as i should like to see," he said.
""in fact -- er -- she seems to have gone backward the past week.
you must send her to the country, miss langley.
the heat here is too trying for her."
dr. clark might as well have said, "you must send her to the moon" -- or so marcella thought bitterly.
despair filled her heart as she looked at patty's white face and transparent hands and listened to the doctor's coolly professional advice.
patty's illness had already swept away the scant savings of three years.
marcella had nothing left with which to do anything more for her.
she did not make any answer to the doctor -- she could not.
besides, what could she say, with patty's big blue eyes, bigger and bluer than ever in her thin face, looking at her so wistfully?
she dared not say it was impossible.
but aunt emma had no such scruples.
with a great clatter and racket, that lady fell upon the dishes that held patty's almost untasted dinner and whisked them away while her tongue kept time to her jerky movements.
""goodness me, doctor, do you think you're talking to millionaires?
where do you suppose the money is to come from to send patty to the country?
i ca n't afford it, that is certain.
i think i do pretty well to give marcella and patty their board free, and i have to work my fingers to the bone to do that.
it's all nonsense about patty, anyhow.
what she ought to do is to make an effort to get better.
she does n't -- she just mopes and pines.
she wo n't eat a thing i cook for her.
how can anyone expect to get better if she does n't eat?"
aunt emma glared at the doctor as if she were triumphantly sure that she had propounded an unanswerable question.
a dull red flush rose to marcella's face.
""oh, aunt emma, i ca n't eat!"
said patty wearily.
""it is n't because i wo n't -- indeed, i ca n't."
""humph!
i suppose my cooking is n't fancy enough for you -- that's the trouble.
well, i have n't the time to put any frills on it.
i think i do pretty well to wait on you at all with all that work piling up before me.
but some people imagine that they were born to be waited on."
aunt emma whirled the last dish from the table and left the room, slamming the door behind her.
the doctor shrugged his shoulders.
he had become used to miss gibson's tirades during patty's illness.
but marcella had never got used to them -- never, in all the three years she had lived with her aunt.
they flicked on the raw as keenly as ever.
this morning it seemed unbearable.
it took every atom of marcella's self-control to keep her from voicing her resentful thoughts.
it was only for patty's sake that she was able to restrain herself.
it was only for patty's sake, too, that she did not, as soon as the doctor had gone, give way to tears.
instead, she smiled bravely into the little sister's eyes.
""let me brush your hair now, dear, and bathe your face."
""have you time?"
said patty anxiously.
""yes, i think so."
patty gave a sigh of content.
""i'm so glad!
aunt emma always hurts me when she brushes my hair -- she is in such a hurry.
you're so gentle, marcella, you do n't make my head ache at all.
but oh!
i'm so tired of being sick.
i wish i could get well faster.
marcy, do you think i can be sent to the country?"
""i -- i do n't know, dear.
i'll see if i can think of any way to manage it," said marcella, striving to speak hopefully.
patty drew a long breath.
""oh, marcy, it would be lovely to see the green fields again, and the woods and brooks, as we did that summer we spent in the country before father died.
i wish we could live in the country always.
i'm sure i would soon get better if i could go -- if it was only for a little while.
it's so hot here -- and the factory makes such a noise -- my head seems to go round and round all the time.
and aunt emma scolds so."
""you must n't mind aunt emma, dear," said marcella.
""you know she does n't really mean it -- it is just a habit she has got into.
she was really very good to you when you were so sick.
she sat up night after night with you, and made me go to bed.
there now, dearie, you're fresh and sweet, and i must hurry to the store, or i'll be late.
try and have a little nap, and i'll bring you home some oranges tonight."
marcella dropped a kiss on patty's cheek, put on her hat and went out.
as soon as she left the house, she quickened her steps almost to a run.
she feared she would be late, and that meant a ten-cent fine.
ten cents loomed as large as ten dollars now to marcella's eyes when every dime meant so much.
but fast as she went, her distracted thoughts went faster.
she could not send patty to the country.
there was no way, think, plan, worry as she might.
and if she could not!
marcella remembered patty's face and the doctor's look, and her heart sank like lead.
patty was growing weaker every day instead of stronger, and the weather was getting hotter.
oh, if patty were to -- to -- but marcella could not complete the sentence even in thought.
if they were not so desperately poor!
marcella's bitterness overflowed her soul at the thought.
everywhere around her were evidences of wealth -- wealth often lavishly and foolishly spent -- and she could not get money enough anywhere to save her sister's life!
she almost felt that she hated all those smiling, well-dressed people who thronged the streets.
by the time she reached the store, poor marcella's heart was seething with misery and resentment.
three years before, when marcella had been sixteen and patty nine, their parents had died, leaving them absolutely alone in the world except for their father's half-sister, miss gibson, who lived in canning and earned her livelihood washing and mending for the hands employed in the big factory nearby.
she had grudgingly offered the girls a home, which marcella had accepted because she must.
she obtained a position in one of the canning stores at three dollars a week, out of which she contrived to dress herself and patty and send the latter to school.
her life for three years was one of absolute drudgery, yet until now she had never lost courage, but had struggled bravely on, hoping for better times in the future when she should get promotion and patty would be old enough to teach school.
but now marcella's courage and hopefulness had gone out like a spent candle.
she was late at the store, and that meant a fine; her head ached, and her feet felt like lead as she climbed the stairs to her department -- a hot, dark, stuffy corner behind the shirtwaist counter.
it was warm and close at any time, but today it was stifling, and there was already a crowd of customers, for it was the day of a bargain sale.
the heat and noise and chatter got on marcella's tortured nerves.
she felt that she wanted to scream, but instead she turned calmly to a waiting customer -- a big, handsome, richly dressed woman.
marcella noted with an ever-increasing bitterness that the woman wore a lace collar the price of which would have kept patty in the country for a year.
she was mrs. liddell -- marcella knew her by sight -- and she was in a very bad temper because she had been kept waiting.
for the next half hour she badgered and worried marcella to the point of distraction.
nothing suited her.
pile after pile, box after box, of shirtwaists did marcella take down for her, only to have them flung aside with sarcastic remarks.
mrs. liddell seemed to hold marcella responsible for the lack of waists that suited her; her tongue grew sharper and sharper and her comments more trying.
then she mislaid her purse, and was disagreeable about that until it turned up.
marcella shut her lips so tightly that they turned white to keep back the impatient retort that rose momentarily to her lips.
the insolence of some customers was always trying to the sensitive, high-spirited girl, but today it seemed unbearable.
her head throbbed fiercely with the pain of the ever-increasing ache, and -- what was the lady on her right saying to a friend?
""yes, she had typhoid, you know -- a very bad form.
she rallied from it, but she was so exhausted that she could n't really recover, and the doctor said --" "really," interrupted mrs. liddell's sharp voice, "may i ask you to attend to me, if you please?
no doubt gossip may be very interesting to you, but i am accustomed to having a clerk pay some small attention to my requirements.
if you can not attend to your business, i shall go to the floor walker and ask him to direct me to somebody who can.
the laziness and disobligingness of the girls in this store is really getting beyond endurance."
a passionate answer was on the point of marcella's tongue.
all her bitterness and suffering and resentment flashed into her face and eyes.
for one moment she was determined to speak out, to repay mrs. liddell's insolence in kind.
a retort was ready to her hand.
everyone knew that mrs. liddell, before her marriage to a wealthy man, had been a working girl.
what could be easier than to say contemptuously: "you should be a judge of a clerk's courtesy and ability, madam.
you were a shop girl yourself once?"
but if she said it, what would follow?
prompt and instant dismissal.
and patty?
the thought of the little sister quelled the storm in marcella's soul.
for patty's sake she must control her temper -- and she did.
with an effort that left her white and tremulous she crushed back the hot words and said quietly: "i beg your pardon, mrs. liddell.
i did not mean to be inattentive.
let me show you some of our new lingerie waists, i think you will like them."
but mrs. liddell did not like the new lingerie waists which marcella brought to her in her trembling hands.
for another half hour she examined and found fault and sneered.
then she swept away with the scornful remark that she did n't see a thing there that was fit to wear, and she would go to markwell bros. and see if they had anything worth looking at.
when she had gone, marcella leaned against the counter, pale and exhausted.
she must have a breathing spell.
oh, how her head ached!
how hot and stifling and horrible everything was!
she longed for the country herself.
oh, if she and patty could only go away to some place where there were green clover meadows and cool breezes and great hills where the air was sweet and pure!
during all this time a middle-aged woman had been sitting on a stool beside the bargain counter.
when a clerk asked her if she wished to be waited on, she said, "no, i'm just waiting here for a friend who promised to meet me."
she was tall and gaunt and grey haired.
she had square jaws and cold grey eyes and an aggressive nose, but there was something attractive in her plain face, a mingling of common sense and kindliness.
she watched marcella and mrs. liddell closely and lost nothing of all that was said and done on both sides.
now and then she smiled grimly and nodded.
when mrs. liddell had gone, she rose and leaned over the counter.
marcella opened her burning eyes and pulled herself wearily together.
""what can i do for you?"
she said.
""nothing.
i ai n't looking for to have anything done for me.
you need to have something done for you, i guess, by the looks of you.
you seem dead beat out.
are n't you awful tired?
i've been listening to that woman jawing you till i felt like rising up and giving her a large and wholesome piece of my mind.
i do n't know how you kept your patience with her, but i can tell you i admired you for it, and i made up my mind i'd tell you so."
the kindness and sympathy in her tone broke marcella down.
tears rushed to her eyes.
she bowed her head on her hands and said sobbingly, "oh, i am tired!
but it's not that.
i'm -- i'm in such trouble."
""i knew you were," said the other, with a nod of her head.
""i could tell that right off by your face.
do you know what i said to myself?
i said, "that girl has got somebody at home awful sick."
that's what i said.
was i right?"
""yes, indeed you were," said marcella.
""i knew it" -- another triumphant nod.
""now, you just tell me all about it.
it'll do you good to talk it over with somebody.
here, i'll pretend i'm looking at shirtwaists, so that floor walker wo n't be coming down on you, and i'll be as hard to please as that other woman was, so's you can take your time.
who's sick -- and what's the matter?"
marcella told the whole story, choking back her sobs and forcing herself to speak calmly, having the fear of the floor walker before her eyes.
""and i ca n't afford to send patty to the country -- i ca n't -- and i know she wo n't get better if she does n't go," she concluded.
""dear, dear, but that's too bad!
something must be done.
let me see -- let me put on my thinking cap.
what is your name?"
""marcella langley."
the older woman dropped the lingerie waist she was pretending to examine and stared at marcella.
""you do n't say!
look here, what was your mother's name before she was married?"
""mary carvell."
""well, i have heard of coincidences, but this beats all!
mary carvell!
well, did you ever hear your mother speak of a girl friend of hers called josephine draper?"
""i should think i did!
you do n't mean --" "i do mean it.
i'm josephine draper.
your mother and i went to school together, and we were as much as sisters to each other until she got married.
then she went away, and after a few years i lost trace of her.
i did n't even know she was dead.
poor mary!
well, my duty is plain -- that's one comfort -- my duty and my pleasure, too.
your sister is coming out to dalesboro to stay with me.
yes, and you are too, for the whole summer.
you need n't say you're not, because you are.
i've said so.
there's room at fir cottage for you both.
yes, fir cottage -- i guess you've heard your mother speak of that.
there's her old room out there that we always slept in when she came to stay all night with me.
it's all ready for you.
what's that?
you ca n't afford to lose your place here?
bless your heart, child, you wo n't lose it!
the owner of this store is my nephew, and he'll do considerable to oblige me, as well he might, seeing as i brought him up.
to think that mary carvell's daughter has been in his store for three years, and me never suspecting it!
and i might never have found you out at all if you had n't been so patient with that woman.
if you'd sassed her back, i'd have thought she deserved it and would n't have blamed you a mite, but i would n't have bothered coming to talk to you either.
well, well well!
poor child, do n't cry.
you just pick up and go home.
i'll make it all right with tom.
you're pretty near played out yourself, i can see that.
but a summer in fir cottage, with plenty of cream and eggs and my cookery, will soon make another girl of you.
do n't you dare to thank me.
it's a privilege to be able to do something for mary carvell's girls.
i just loved mary."
the upshot of the whole matter was that marcella and patty went, two days later, to dalesboro, where miss draper gave them a hearty welcome to fir cottage -- a quaint, delightful little house circled by big scotch firs and overgrown with vines.
never were such delightful weeks as those that followed.
patty came rapidly back to health and strength.
as for marcella, miss draper's prophecy was also fulfilled; she soon looked and felt like another girl.
the dismal years of drudgery behind her were forgotten like a dream, and she lived wholly in the beautiful present, in the walks and drives, the flowers and grass slopes, and in the pleasant household duties which she shared with miss draper.
""i love housework," she exclaimed one september day.
""i do n't like the thought of going back to the store a bit."
""well, you're not going back," calmly said miss draper, who had a habit of arranging other people's business for them that might have been disconcerting had it not been for her keen insight and hearty good sense.
""you're going to stay here with me -- you and patty.
i do n't propose to die of lonesomeness losing you, and i need somebody to help me about the house.
i've thought it all out.
you are to call me aunt josephine, and patty is to go to school.
i had this scheme in mind from the first, but i thought i'd wait to see how we got along living in the same house, and how you liked it here, before i spoke out.
no, you need n't thank me this time either.
i'm doing this every bit as much for my sake as yours.
well, that's all settled.
patty wo n't object, bless her rosy cheeks!"
""oh!"
said marcella, with eyes shining through her tears.
""i'm so happy, dear miss draper -- i mean aunt josephine.
i'll love to stay here -- and i will thank you."
""fudge!"
remarked miss draper, who felt uncomfortably near crying herself.
""you might go out and pick a basket of golden gems.
i want to make some jelly for patty."
margaret's patient -lsb- illustration: "did dr. forbes think she ought to give up her trip?" -rsb-
margaret paused a moment at the gate and looked back at the quaint old house under its snowy firs with a thrill of proprietary affection.
it was her home; for the first time in her life she had a real home, and the long, weary years of poorly paid drudgery were all behind her.
before her was a prospect of independence and many of the delights she had always craved; in the immediate future was a trip to vancouver with mrs. boyd.
for i shall go, of course, thought margaret, as she walked briskly down the snowy road.
i've always wanted to see the rockies, and to go there with mrs. boyd will double the pleasure.
she is such a delightful companion.
margaret campbell had been an orphan ever since she could remember.
she had been brought up by a distant relative of her father's -- that is, she had been given board, lodging, some schooling and indifferent clothes for the privilege of working like a little drudge in the house of the grim cousin who sheltered her.
the death of this cousin flung margaret on her own resources.
a friend had procured her employment as the "companion" of a rich, eccentric old lady, infirm of health and temper.
margaret lived with her for five years, and to the young girl they seemed treble the time.
her employer was fault-finding, peevish, unreasonable, and many a time margaret's patience almost failed her -- almost, but not quite.
in the end it brought her a more tangible reward than sometimes falls to the lot of the toiler.
mrs. constance died, and in her will she left to margaret her little up-country cottage and enough money to provide her an income for the rest of her life.
margaret took immediate possession of her little house and, with the aid of a capable old servant, soon found herself very comfortable.
she realized that her days of drudgery were over, and that henceforth life would be a very different thing from what it had been.
margaret meant to have "a good time."
she had never had any pleasure and now she was resolved to garner in all she could of the joys of existence.
""i'm not going to do a single useful thing for a year," she had told mrs. boyd gaily.
""just think of it -- a whole delightful year of vacation, to go and come at will, to read, travel, dream, rest.
after that, i mean to see if i can find something to do for other folks, but i'm going to have this one golden year.
and the first thing in it is our trip to vancouver.
i'm so glad i have the chance to go with you.
it's a wee bit short notice, but i'll be ready when you want to start."
altogether, margaret felt pretty well satisfied with life as she tripped blithely down the country road between the ranks of snow-laden spruces, with the blue sky above and the crisp, exhilarating air all about.
there was only one drawback, but it was a pretty serious one.
it's so lonely by spells, margaret sometimes thought wistfully.
all the joys my good fortune has brought me ca n't quite fill my heart.
there's always one little empty, aching spot.
oh, if i had somebody of my very own to love and care for, a mother, a sister, even a cousin.
but there's nobody.
i have n't a relative in the world, and there are times when i'd give almost anything to have one.
well, i must try to be satisfied with friendship, instead.
margaret's meditations were interrupted by a brisk footstep behind her, and presently dr. forbes came up.
""good afternoon, miss campbell.
taking a constitutional?"
""yes.
is n't it a lovely day?
i suppose you are on your professional rounds.
how are all your patients?"
""most of them are doing well.
but i'm sorry to say i have a new one and am very much worried about her.
do you know freda martin?"
""the little teacher in the primary department who boards with the wayes?
yes, i've met her once or twice.
is she ill?"
""yes, seriously.
it's typhoid, and she has been going about longer than she should.
i do n't know what is to be done with her.
it seems she is like yourself in one respect, miss campbell; she is utterly alone in the world.
mrs. waye is crippled with rheumatism and ca n't nurse her, and i fear it will be impossible to get a nurse in blythefield.
she ought to be taken from the wayes".
the house is overrun with children, is right next door to that noisy factory, and in other respects is a poor place for a sick girl."
""it is too bad, i am very sorry," said margaret sympathetically.
dr. forbes shot a keen look at her from his deep-set eyes.
""are you willing to show your sympathy in a practical form, miss campbell?"
he said bluntly.
""you told me the other day you meant to begin work for others next year.
why not begin now?
here's a splendid chance to befriend a friendless girl.
he was all her own and she knew that he found strength and comfort in her sympathy and understanding.
it was very wonderful to know she meant so much to him -- the knowledge helped her through moments that would otherwise have been unendurable, and gave her power to smile -- and even to laugh a little.
when walter had gone she might indulge in the comfort of tears, but not while he was here.
she would not even let herself cry at night, lest her eyes should betray her to him in the morning.
on his last evening at home they went together to rainbow valley and sat down on the bank of the brook, under the white lady, where the gay revels of olden days had been held in the cloudless years.
rainbow valley was roofed over with a sunset of unusual splendour that night; a wonderful grey dusk just touched with starlight followed it; and then came moonshine, hinting, hiding, revealing, lighting up little dells and hollows here, leaving others in dark, velvet shadow.
""when i am "somewhere in france,"" said walter, looking around him with eager eyes on all the beauty his soul loved, "i shall remember these still, dewy, moon-drenched places.
the balsam of the fir-trees; the peace of those white pools of moonshine; the "strength of the hills" -- what a beautiful old biblical phrase that is.
rilla!
look at those old hills around us -- the hills we looked up at as children, wondering what lay for us in the great world beyond them.
how calm and strong they are -- how patient and changeless -- like the heart of a good woman.
rilla-my-rilla, do you know what you have been to me the past year?
i want to tell you before i go.
i could not have lived through it if it had not been for you, little loving, believing heart."
rilla dared not try to speak.
she slipped her hand into walter's and pressed it hard.
""and when i'm over there, rilla, in that hell upon earth which men who have forgotten god have made, it will be the thought of you that will help me most.
i know you'll be as plucky and patient as you have shown yourself to be this past year -- i'm not afraid for you.
i know that no matter what happens, you'll be rilla-my-rilla -- no matter what happens."
rilla repressed tear and sigh, but she could not repress a little shiver, and walter knew that he had said enough.
after a moment of silence, in which each made an unworded promise to each other, he said, "now we wo n't be sober any more.
we'll look beyond the years -- to the time when the war will be over and jem and jerry and i will come marching home and we'll all be happy again."
""we wo n't be -- happy -- in the same way," said rilla.
""no, not in the same way.
nobody whom this war has touched will ever be happy again in quite the same way.
but it will be a better happiness, i think, little sister -- a happiness we've earned.
we were very happy before the war, were n't we?
with a home like ingleside, and a father and mother like ours we could n't help being happy.
but that happiness was a gift from life and love; it was n't really ours -- life could take it back at any time.
it can never take away the happiness we win for ourselves in the way of duty.
i've realised that since i went into khaki.
in spite of my occasional funks, when i fall to living over things beforehand, i've been happy since that night in may.
rilla, be awfully good to mother while i'm away.
it must be a horrible thing to be a mother in this war -- the mothers and sisters and wives and sweethearts have the hardest times.
rilla, you beautiful little thing, are you anybody's sweetheart?
if you are, tell me before i go."
""no," said rilla.
then, impelled by a wish to be absolutely frank with walter in this talk that might be the last they would ever have, she added, blushing wildly in the moonlight, "but if -- kenneth ford -- wanted me to be --" "i see," said walter.
""and ken's in khaki, too.
poor little girlie, it's a bit hard for you all round.
well, i'm not leaving any girl to break her heart about me -- thank god for that."
rilla glanced up at the manse on the hill.
she could see a light in una meredith's window.
she felt tempted to say something -- then she knew she must not.
it was not her secret: and, anyway, she did not know -- she only suspected.
walter looked about him lingeringly and lovingly.
this spot had always been so dear to him.
what fun they all had had here lang syne.
phantoms of memory seemed to pace the dappled paths and peep merrily through the swinging boughs -- jem and jerry, bare-legged, sunburned schoolboys, fishing in the brook and frying trout over the old stone fireplace; nan and di and faith, in their dimpled, fresh-eyed childish beauty; una the sweet and shy, carl, poring over ants and bugs, little slangy, sharp-tongued, good-hearted mary vance -- the old walter that had been himself lying on the grass reading poetry or wandering through palaces of fancy.
they were all there around him -- he could see them almost as plainly as he saw rilla -- as plainly as he had once seen the pied piper piping down the valley in a vanished twilight.
and they said to him, those gay little ghosts of other days, "we were the children of yesterday, walter -- fight a good fight for the children of to-day and to-morrow."
""where are you, walter," cried rilla, laughing a little.
""come back -- come back."
walter came back with a long breath.
he stood up and looked about him at the beautiful valley of moonlight, as if to impress on his mind and heart every charm it possessed -- the great dark plumes of the firs against the silvery sky, the stately white lady, the old magic of the dancing brook, the faithful tree lovers, the beckoning, tricksy paths.
""i shall see it so in my dreams," he said, as he turned away.
they went back to ingleside.
mr. and mrs. meredith were there, with gertrude oliver, who had come from lowbridge to say good-bye.
everybody was quite cheerful and bright, but nobody said much about the war being soon over, as they had said when jem went away.
they did not talk about the war at all -- and they thought of nothing else.
at last they gathered around the piano and sang the grand old hymn: "oh god, our help in ages past our hope for years to come.
our shelter from the stormy blast and our eternal home."
""we all come back to god in these days of soul-sifting," said gertrude to john meredith.
""there have been many days in the past when i did n't believe in god -- not as god -- only as the impersonal great first cause of the scientists.
i believe in him now -- i have to -- there's nothing else to fall back on but god -- humbly, starkly, unconditionally.""
"our help in ages past" -- "the same yesterday, to-day and for ever,"" said the minister gently.
""when we forget god -- he remembers us."
there was no crowd at the glen station the next morning to see walter off.
it was becoming a commonplace for a khaki clad boy to board that early morning train after his last leave.
besides his own, only the manse folk were there, and mary vance.
mary had sent her miller off the week before, with a determined grin, and now considered herself entitled to give expert opinion on how such partings should be conducted.
""the main thing is to smile and act as if nothing was happening," she informed the ingleside group.
""the boys all hate the sob act like poison.
miller told me i was n't to come near the station if i could n't keep from bawling.
so i got through with my crying beforehand, and at the last i said to him, "good luck, miller, and if you come back you'll find i have n't changed any, and if you do n't come back i'll always be proud you went, and in any case do n't fall in love with a french girl."
miller swore he would n't, but you never can tell about those fascinating foreign hussies.
anyhow, the last sight he had of me i was smiling to my limit.
gee, all the rest of the day my face felt as if it had been starched and ironed into a smile."
in spite of mary's advice and example mrs. blythe, who had sent jem off with a smile, could not quite manage one for walter.
but at least no one cried.
dog monday came out of his lair in the shipping-shed and sat down close to walter, thumping his tail vigorously on the boards of the platform whenever walter spoke to him, and looking up with confident eyes, as if to say, "i know you'll find jem and bring him back to me."
""so long, old fellow," said carl meredith cheerfully, when the good-byes had to be said.
""tell them over there to keep their spirits up -- i am coming along presently."
""me too," said shirley laconically, proffering a brown paw.
susan heard him and her face turned very grey.
una shook hands quietly, looking at him with wistful, sorrowful, dark-blue eyes.
but then una's eyes had always been wistful.
walter bent his handsome black head in its khaki cap and kissed her with the warm, comradely kiss of a brother.
he had never kissed her before, and for a fleeting moment una's face betrayed her, if anyone had noticed.
but nobody did; the conductor was shouting "all aboard"; everybody was trying to look very cheerful.
walter turned to rilla; she held his hands and looked up at him.
she would not see him again until the day broke and the shadows vanished -- and she knew not if that daybreak would be on this side of the grave or beyond it.
""good-bye," she said.
on her lips it lost all the bitterness it had won through the ages of parting and bore instead all the sweetness of the old loves of all the women who had ever loved and prayed for the beloved.
""write me often and bring jims up faithfully, according to the gospel of morgan," walter said lightly, having said all his serious things the night before in rainbow valley.
but at the last moment he took her face between his hands and looked deep into her gallant eyes.
""god bless you, rilla-my-rilla," he said softly and tenderly.
after all it was not a hard thing to fight for a land that bore daughters like this.
he stood on the rear platform and waved to them as the train pulled out.
rilla was standing by herself, but una meredith came to her and the two girls who loved him most stood together and held each other's cold hands as the train rounded the curve of the wooded hill.
rilla spent an hour in rainbow valley that morning about which she never said a word to anyone; she did not even write in her diary about it; when it was over she went home and made rompers for jims.
in the evening she went to a junior red cross committee meeting and was severely businesslike.
""you would never suppose," said irene howard to olive kirk afterwards, "that walter had left for the front only this morning.
but some people really have no depth of feeling.
i often wish i could take things as lightly as rilla blythe."
chapter xvi realism and romance "warsaw has fallen," said dr. blythe with a resigned air, as he brought the mail in one warm august day.
gertrude and mrs. blythe looked dismally at each other, and rilla, who was feeding jims a morganized diet from a carefully sterilized spoon, laid the said spoon down on his tray, utterly regardless of germs, and said, "oh, dear me," in as tragic a tone as if the news had come as a thunderbolt instead of being a foregone conclusion from the preceding week's dispatches.
they had thought they were quite resigned to warsaw's fall but now they knew they had, as always, hoped against hope.
""now, let us take a brace," said susan.
""it is not the terrible thing we have been thinking.
i read a dispatch three columns long in the montreal herald yesterday that proved that warsaw was not important from a military point of view at all.
so let us take the military point of view, doctor dear."
""i read that dispatch, too, and it has encouraged me immensely," said gertrude.
""i knew then and i know now that it was a lie from beginning to end.
but i am in that state of mind where even a lie is a comfort, providing it is a cheerful lie."
""in that case, miss oliver dear, the german official reports ought to be all you need," said susan sarcastically.
""i never read them now because they make me so mad i can not put my thoughts properly on my work after a dose of them.
even this news about warsaw has taken the edge off my afternoon's plans.
misfortunes never come singly.
i spoiled my baking of bread today -- and now warsaw has fallen -- and here is little kitchener bent on choking himself to death."
jims was evidently trying to swallow his spoon, germs and all.
rilla rescued him mechanically and was about to resume the operation of feeding him when a casual remark of her father's sent such a shock and thrill over her that for the second time she dropped that doomed spoon.
""kenneth ford is down at martin west's over-harbour," the doctor was saying.
""his regiment was on its way to the front but was held up in kingsport for some reason, and ken got leave of absence to come over to the island."
""i hope he will come up to see us," exclaimed mrs. blythe.
""he only has a day or two off, i believe," said the doctor absently.
nobody noticed rilla's flushed face and trembling hands.
even the most thoughtful and watchful of parents do not see everything that goes on under their very noses.
rilla made a third attempt to give the long-suffering jims his dinner, but all she could think of was the question -- would ken come to see her before he went away?
she had not heard from him for a long while.
had he forgotten her completely?
if he did not come she would know that he had.
perhaps there was even -- some other girl back there in toronto.
of course there was.
she was a little fool to be thinking about him at all.
she would not think about him.
if he came, well and good.
it would only be courteous of him to make a farewell call at ingleside where he had often been a guest.
if he did not come -- well and good, too.
it did not matter very much.
nobody was going to fret.
that was all settled comfortably -- she was quite indifferent -- but meanwhile jims was being fed with a haste and recklessness that would have filled the soul of morgan with horror.
jims himself did n't like it, being a methodical baby, accustomed to swallowing spoonfuls with a decent interval for breath between each.
he protested, but his protests availed him nothing.
rilla, as far as the care and feeding of infants was concerned, was utterly demoralized.
then the telephone-bell rang.
there was nothing unusual about the telephone ringing.
it rang on an average every ten minutes at ingleside.
but rilla dropped jims" spoon again -- on the carpet this time -- and flew to the "phone as if life depended on her getting there before anybody else.
jims, his patience exhausted, lifted up his voice and wept.
""hello, is this ingleside?"
""yes."
""that you, rilla?"
""yeth -- yeth."
oh, why could n't jims stop howling for just one little minute?
why did n't somebody come in and choke him?
""know who's speaking?"
oh, did n't she know!
would n't she know that voice anywhere -- at any time?
""it's ken -- is n't it?"
""sure thing.
i'm here for a look-in.
can i come up to ingleside tonight and see you?"
""of courthe."
had he used "you" in the singular or plural sense?
presently she would wring jims" neck -- oh, what was ken saying?
""see here, rilla, can you arrange that there wo n't be more than a few dozen people round?
understand?
i ca n't make my meaning clearer over this bally rural line.
there are a dozen receivers down."
did she understand!
yes, she understood.
""i'll try," she said.
""i'll be up about eight then.
by-by."
rilla hung up the "phone and flew to jims.
but she did not wring that injured infant's neck.
instead she snatched him bodily out of his chair, crushed him against her face, kissed him rapturously on his milky mouth, and danced wildly around the room with him in her arms.
after this jims was relieved to find that she returned to sanity, gave him the rest of his dinner properly, and tucked him away for his afternoon nap with the little lullaby he loved best of all.
she sewed at red cross shirts for the rest of the afternoon and built a crystal castle of dreams, all a-quiver with rainbows.
ken wanted to see her -- to see her alone.
that could be easily managed.
shirley would n't bother them, father and mother were going to the manse, miss oliver never played gooseberry, and jims always slept the clock round from seven to seven.
she would entertain ken on the veranda -- it would be moonlight -- she would wear her white georgette dress and do her hair up -- yes, she would -- at least in a low knot at the nape of her neck.
mother could n't object to that, surely.
oh, how wonderful and romantic it would be!
would ken say anything -- he must mean to say something or why should he be so particular about seeing her alone?
what if it rained -- susan had been complaining about mr. hyde that morning!
what if some officious junior red called to discuss belgians and shirts?
or, worst of all, what if fred arnold dropped in?
he did occasionally.
the evening came at last and was all that could be desired in an evening.
the doctor and his wife went to the manse, shirley and miss oliver went they alone knew where, susan went to the store for household supplies, and jims went to dreamland.
rilla put on her georgette gown, knotted up her hair and bound a little double string of pearls around it.
then she tucked a cluster of pale pink baby roses at her belt.
would ken ask her for a rose for a keepsake?
she knew that jem had carried to the trenches in flanders a faded rose that faith meredith had kissed and given him the night before he left.
rilla looked very sweet when she met ken in the mingled moonlight and vine shadows of the big veranda.
the hand she gave him was cold and she was so desperately anxious not to lisp that her greeting was prim and precise.
how handsome and tall kenneth looked in his lieutenant's uniform!
it made him seem older, too -- so much so that rilla felt rather foolish.
had n't it been the height of absurdity for her to suppose that this splendid young officer had anything special to say to her, little rilla blythe of glen st. mary?
likely she had n't understood him after all -- he had only meant that he did n't want a mob of folks around making a fuss over him and trying to lionize him, as they had probably done over-harbour.
yes, of course, that was all he meant -- and she, little idiot, had gone and vainly imagined that he did n't want anybody but her.
and he would think she had manoeuvred everybody away so that they could be alone together, and he would laugh to himself at her.
""this is better luck than i hoped for," said ken, leaning back in his chair and looking at her with very unconcealed admiration in his eloquent eyes.
""i was sure someone would be hanging about and it was just you i wanted to see, rilla-my-rilla."
rilla's dream castle flashed into the landscape again.
this was unmistakable enough certainly -- not much doubt as to his meaning here.
""there are n't -- so many of us -- to poke around as there used to be," she said softly.
""no, that's so," said ken gently.
""jem and walter and the girls away -- it makes a big blank, does n't it?
but --" he leaned forward until his dark curls almost brushed her hair -- "does n't fred arnold try to fill the blank occasionally.
i've been told so."
at this moment, before rilla could make any reply, jims began to cry at the top of his voice in the room whose open window was just above them -- jims, who hardly ever cried in the evening.
moreover, he was crying, as rilla knew from experience, with a vim and energy that betokened that he had been already whimpering softly unheard for some time and was thoroughly exasperated.
when jims started in crying like that he made a thorough job of it.
rilla knew that there was no use to sit still and pretend to ignore him.
he would n't stop; and conversation of any kind was out of the question when such shrieks and howls were floating over your head.
besides, she was afraid kenneth would think she was utterly unfeeling if she sat still and let a baby cry like that.
he was not likely acquainted with morgan's invaluable volume.
she got up.
""jims has had a nightmare, i think.
he sometimes has one and he is always badly frightened by it.
excuse me for a moment."
rilla flew upstairs, wishing quite frankly that soup tureens had never been invented.
but when jims, at sight of her, lifted his little arms entreatingly and swallowed several sobs, with tears rolling down his cheeks, resentment went out of her heart.
after all, the poor darling was frightened.
she picked him up gently and rocked him soothingly until his sobs ceased and his eyes closed.
then she essayed to lay him down in his crib.
jims opened his eyes and shrieked a protest.
this performance was repeated twice.
rilla grew desperate.
she could n't leave ken down there alone any longer -- she had been away nearly half an hour already.
with a resigned air she marched downstairs, carrying jims, and sat down on the veranda.
it was, no doubt, a ridiculous thing to sit and cuddle a contrary war-baby when your best young man was making his farewell call, but there was nothing else to be done.
jims was supremely happy.
he kicked his little pink-soled feet rapturously out under his white nighty and gave one of his rare laughs.
he was beginning to be a very pretty baby; his golden hair curled in silken ringlets all over his little round head and his eyes were beautiful.
""he's a decorative kiddy all right, is n't he?"
said ken.
""his looks are very well," said rilla, bitterly, as if to imply that they were much the best of him.
jims, being an astute infant, sensed trouble in the atmosphere and realized that it was up to him to clear it away.
he turned his face up to rilla, smiled adorably and said, clearly and beguilingly, "will -- will."
it was the very first time he had spoken a word or tried to speak.
rilla was so delighted that she forgot her grudge against him.
she forgave him with a hug and kiss.
jims, understanding that he was restored to favour, cuddled down against her just where a gleam of light from the lamp in the living-room struck across his hair and turned it into a halo of gold against her breast.
kenneth sat very still and silent, looking at rilla -- at the delicate, girlish silhouette of her, her long lashes, her dented lip, her adorable chin.
in the dim moonlight, as she sat with her head bent a little over jims, the lamplight glinting on her pearls until they glistened like a slender nimbus, he thought she looked exactly like the madonna that hung over his mother's desk at home.
he carried that picture of her in his heart to the horror of the battlefields of france.
he had had a strong fancy for rilla blythe ever since the night of the four winds dance; but it was when he saw her there, with little jims in her arms, that he loved her and realized it.
and all the while, poor rilla was sitting, disappointed and humiliated, feeling that her last evening with ken was spoiled and wondering why things always had to go so contrarily outside of books.
she felt too absurd to try to talk.
evidently ken was completely disgusted, too, since he was sitting there in such stony silence.
hope revived momentarily when jims went so thoroughly asleep that she thought it would be safe to lay him down on the couch in the living-room.
but when she came out again susan was sitting on the veranda, loosening her bonnet strings with the air of one who meant to stay where she was for some time.
""have you got your baby to sleep?"
she asked kindly.
your baby!
really, susan might have more tact.
""yes," said rilla shortly.
susan laid her parcels on the reed table, as one determined to do her duty.
she was very tired but she must help rilla out.
here was kenneth ford who had come to call on the family and they were all unfortunately out, and "the poor child" had had to entertain him alone.
but susan had come to her rescue -- susan would do her part no matter how tired she was.
""dear me, how you have grown up," she said, looking at ken's six feet of khaki uniform without the least awe.
susan had grown used to khaki now, and at sixty-four even a lieutenant's uniform is just clothes and nothing else.
""it is an amazing thing how fast children do grow up.
rilla here, now, is almost fifteen."
""i'm going on seventeen, susan," cried rilla almost passionately.
she was a whole month past sixteen.
it was intolerable of susan.
""it seems just the other day that you were all babies," said susan, ignoring rilla's protest.
""you were really the prettiest baby i ever saw, ken, though your mother had an awful time trying to cure you of sucking your thumb.
do you remember the day i spanked you?"
""no," said ken.
""oh well, i suppose you would be too young -- you were only about four and you were here with your mother and you insisted on teasing nan until she cried.
i had tried several ways of stopping you but none availed, and i saw that a spanking was the only thing that would serve.
so i picked you up and laid you across my knee and lambasted you well.
you howled at the top of your voice but you left nan alone after that."
rilla was writhing.
had n't susan any realization that she was addressing an officer of the canadian army?
apparently she had not.
oh, what would ken think?
""i suppose you do not remember the time your mother spanked you either," continued susan, who seemed to be bent on reviving tender reminiscences that evening.
""i shall never, no never, forget it.
she was up here one night with you when you were about three, and you and walter were playing out in the kitchen yard with a kitten.
i had a big puncheon of rainwater by the spout which i was reserving for making soap.
and you and walter began quarrelling over the kitten.
walter was at one side of the puncheon standing on a chair, holding the kitten, and you were standing on a chair at the other side.
you leaned across that puncheon and grabbed the kitten and pulled.
you were always a great hand for taking what you wanted without too much ceremony.
walter held on tight and the poor kitten yelled but you dragged walter and the kitten half over and then you both lost your balance and tumbled into that puncheon, kitten and all.
if i had not been on the spot you would both have been drowned.
i flew to the rescue and hauled you all three out before much harm was done, and your mother, who had seen it all from the upstairs window, came down and picked you up, dripping as you were, and gave you a beautiful spanking.
ah," said susan with a sigh, "those were happy old days at ingleside."
""must have been," said ken.
his voice sounded queer and stiff.
rilla supposed he was hopelessly enraged.
the truth was he dared not trust his voice lest it betray his frantic desire to laugh.
""rilla here, now," said susan, looking affectionately at that unhappy damsel, "never was much spanked.
she was a real well-behaved child for the most part.
but her father did spank her once.
she got two bottles of pills out of his office and dared alice clow to see which of them could swallow all the pills first, and if her father had not happened in the nick of time those two children would have been corpses by night.
as it was, they were both sick enough shortly after.
but the doctor spanked rilla then and there and he made such a thorough job of it that she never meddled with anything in his office afterwards.
we hear a great deal nowadays of something that is called "moral persuasion," but in my opinion a good spanking and no nagging afterwards is a much better thing."
rilla wondered viciously whether susan meant to relate all the family spankings.
but susan had finished with the subject and branched off to another cheerful one.
""i remember little tod macallister over-harbour killed himself that very way, eating up a whole box of fruitatives because he thought they were candy.
it was a very sad affair.
he was," said susan earnestly, "the very cutest little corpse i ever laid my eyes on.
it was very careless of his mother to leave the fruitatives where he could get them, but she was well-known to be a heedless creature.
one day she found a nest of five eggs as she was going across the fields to church with a brand new blue silk dress on.
so she put them in the pocket of her petticoat and when she got to church she forgot all about them and sat down on them and her dress was ruined, not to speak of the petticoat.
let me see -- would not tod be some relation of yours?
your great grandmother west was a macallister.
her brother amos was a macdonaldite in religion.
i am told he used to take the jerks something fearful.
but you look more like your great grandfather west than the macallisters.
he died of a paralytic stroke quite early in life."
""did you see anybody at the store?"
asked rilla desperately, in the faint hope of directing susan's conversation into more agreeable channels.
""nobody except mary vance," said susan, "and she was stepping round as brisk as the irishman's flea."
what terrible similes susan used!
would kenneth think she acquired them from the family!
""to hear mary talk about miller douglas you would think he was the only glen boy who had enlisted," susan went on.
""but of course she always did brag and she has some good qualities i am willing to admit, though i did not think so that time she chased rilla here through the village with a dried codfish till the poor child fell, heels over head, into the puddle before carter flagg's store."
rilla went cold all over with wrath and shame.
were there any more disgraceful scenes in her past that susan could rake up?
as for ken, he could have howled over susan's speeches, but he would not so insult the duenna of his lady, so he sat with a preternaturally solemn face which seemed to poor rilla a haughty and offended one.
""i paid eleven cents for a bottle of ink tonight," complained susan.
""ink is twice as high as it was last year.
perhaps it is because woodrow wilson has been writing so many notes.
it must cost him considerable.
my cousin sophia says woodrow wilson is not the man she expected him to be -- but then no man ever was.
being an old maid, i do not know much about men and have never pretended to, but my cousin sophia is very hard on them, although she married two of them, which you might think was a fair share.
albert crawford's chimney blew down in that big gale we had last week, and when sophia heard the bricks clattering on the roof she thought it was a zeppelin raid and went into hysterics.
and mrs. albert crawford says that of the two things she would have preferred the zeppelin raid."
rilla sat limply in her chair like one hypnotized.
she knew susan would stop talking when she was ready to stop and that no earthly power could make her stop any sooner.
as a rule, she was very fond of susan but just now she hated her with a deadly hatred.
it was ten o'clock.
ken would soon have to go -- the others would soon be home -- and she had not even had a chance to explain to ken that fred arnold filled no blank in her life nor ever could.
her rainbow castle lay in ruins round her.
kenneth got up at last.
he realized that susan was there to stay as long as he did, and it was a three mile walk to martin west's over-harbour.
he wondered if rilla had put susan up to this, not wanting to be left alone with him, lest he say something fred arnold's sweetheart did not want to hear.
rilla got up, too, and walked silently the length of the veranda with him.
they stood there for a moment, ken on the lower step.
the step was half sunk into the earth and mint grew thickly about and over its edge.
often crushed by so many passing feet it gave out its essence freely, and the spicy odour hung round them like a soundless, invisible benediction.
ken looked up at rilla, whose hair was shining in the moonlight and whose eyes were pools of allurement.
all at once he felt sure there was nothing in that gossip about fred arnold.
""rilla," he said in a sudden, intense whisper, "you are the sweetest thing."
rilla flushed and looked at susan.
ken looked, too, and saw that susan's back was turned.
he put his arm about rilla and kissed her.
it was the first time rilla had ever been kissed.
she thought perhaps she ought to resent it but she did n't.
instead, she glanced timidly into kenneth's seeking eyes and her glance was a kiss.
""rilla-my-rilla," said ken, "will you promise that you wo n't let anyone else kiss you until i come back?"
""yes," said rilla, trembling and thrilling.
susan was turning round.
ken loosened his hold and stepped to the walk.
""good-bye," he said casually.
rilla heard herself saying it just as casually.
she stood and watched him down the walk, out of the gate, and down the road.
when the fir wood hid him from her sight she suddenly said "oh," in a choked way and ran down to the gate, sweet blossomy things catching at her skirts as she ran.
leaning over the gate she saw kenneth walking briskly down the road, over the bars of tree shadows and moonlight, his tall, erect figure grey in the white radiance.
as he reached the turn he stopped and looked back and saw her standing amid the tall white lilies by the gate.
he waved his hand -- she waved hers -- he was gone around the turn.
rilla stood there for a little while, gazing across the fields of mist and silver.
she had heard her mother say that she loved turns in roads -- they were so provocative and alluring.
rilla thought she hated them.
she had seen jem and jerry vanish from her around a bend in the road -- then walter -- and now ken.
brothers and playmate and sweetheart -- they were all gone, never, it might be, to return.
yet still the piper piped and the dance of death went on.
when rilla walked slowly back to the house susan was still sitting by the veranda table and susan was sniffing suspiciously.
""i have been thinking, rilla dear, of the old days in the house of dreams, when kenneth's mother and father were courting and jem was a little baby and you were not born or thought of.
it was a very romantic affair and she and your mother were such chums.
to think i should have lived to see her son going to the front.
as if she had not had enough trouble in her early life without this coming upon her!
but we must take a brace and see it through."
all rilla's anger against susan had evaporated.
with ken's kiss still burning on her lips, and the wonderful significance of the promise he had asked thrilling heart and soul, she could not be angry with anyone.
she put her slim white hand into susan's brown, work-hardened one and gave it a squeeze.
susan was a faithful old dear and would lay down her life for any one of them.
""you are tired, rilla dear, and had better go to bed," susan said, patting her hand.
""i noticed you were too tired to talk tonight.
i am glad i came home in time to help you out.
it is very tiresome trying to entertain young men when you are not accustomed to it."
rilla carried jims upstairs and went to bed, but not before she had sat for a long time at her window reconstructing her rainbow castle, with several added domes and turrets.
""i wonder," she said to herself, "if i am, or am not, engaged to kenneth ford."
chapter xvii the weeks wear by rilla read her first love letter in her rainbow valley fir-shadowed nook, and a girl's first love letter, whatever blase, older people may think of it, is an event of tremendous importance in the teens.
after kenneth's regiment had left kingsport there came a fortnight of dully-aching anxiety and when the congregation sang in church on sunday evenings, "oh, hear us when we cry to thee for those in peril on the sea," rilla's voice always failed her; for with the words came a horribly vivid mind picture of a submarined ship sinking beneath pitiless waves amid the struggles and cries of drowning men.
then word came that kenneth's regiment had arrived safely in england; and now, at last, here was his letter.
it began with something that made rilla supremely happy for the moment and ended with a paragraph that crimsoned her cheeks with the wonder and thrill and delight of it.
between beginning and ending the letter was just such a jolly, newsy epistle as ken might have written to anyone; but for the sake of that beginning and ending rilla slept with the letter under her pillow for weeks, sometimes waking in the night to slip her fingers under and just touch it, and looked with secret pity on other girls whose sweethearts could never have written them anything half so wonderful and exquisite.
kenneth was not the son of a famous novelist for nothing.
he "had a way" of expressing things in a few poignant, significant words that seemed to suggest far more than they uttered, and never grew stale or flat or foolish with ever so many scores of readings.
rilla went home from rainbow valley as if she flew rather than walked.
but such moments of uplift were rare that autumn.
to be sure, there was one day in september when great news came of a big allied victory in the west and susan ran out to hoist the flag -- the first time she had hoisted it since the russian line broke and the last time she was to hoist it for many dismal moons.
""likely the big push has begun at last, mrs. dr. dear," she exclaimed, "and we will soon see the finish of the huns.
our boys will be home by christmas now.
hurrah!"
susan was ashamed of herself for hurrahing the minute she had done it, and apologized meekly for such an outburst of juvenility.
""but indeed, mrs. dr. dear, this good news has gone to my head after this awful summer of russian slumps and gallipoli setbacks."
""good news!"
said miss oliver bitterly.
""i wonder if the women whose men have been killed for it will call it good news.
just because our own men are not on that part of the front we are rejoicing as if the victory had cost no lives."
""now, miss oliver dear, do not take that view of it," deprecated susan.
""we have not had much to rejoice over of late and yet men were being killed just the same.
do not let yourself slump like poor cousin sophia.
she said, when the word came, "ah, it is nothing but a rift in the clouds.
we are up this week but we will be down the next."
"well, sophia crawford," said i, -- for i will never give in to her, mrs. dr. dear -- "god himself can not make two hills without a hollow between them, as i have heard it said, but that is no reason why we should not take the good of the hills when we are on them."
but cousin sophia moaned on.
"here is the gallipolly expedition a failure and the grand duke nicholas sent off, and everyone knows the czar of rooshia is a pro-german and the allies have no ammunition and bulgaria is going against us.
and the end is not yet, for england and france must be punished for their deadly sins until they repent in sackcloth and ashes.'"
i think myself," i said, "that they will do their repenting in khaki and trench mud, and it seems to me that the huns should have a few sins to repent of also."
"they are instruments in the hands of the almighty, to purge the garner," said sophia.
and then i got mad, mrs. dr. dear, and told her i did not and never would believe that the almighty ever took such dirty instruments in hand for any purpose whatever, and that i did not consider it decent for her to be using the words of holy writ as glibly as she was doing in ordinary conversation.
she was not, i told her, a minister or even an elder.
and for the time being i squelched her, mrs. dr. dear.
cousin sophia has no spirit.
she is very different from her niece, mrs. dean crawford over-harbour.
you know the dean crawfords had five boys and now the new baby is another boy.
all the connection and especially dean crawford were much disappointed because their hearts had been set on a girl; but mrs. dean just laughed and said, "everywhere i went this summer i saw the sign "men wanted" staring me in the face.
do you think i could go and have a girl under such circumstances?"
there is spirit for you, mrs. dr. dear.
but cousin sophia would say the child was just so much more cannon fodder."
cousin sophia had full range for her pessimism that gloomy autumn, and even susan, incorrigible old optimist as she was, was hard put to it for cheer.
when bulgaria lined up with germany susan only remarked scornfully, "one more nation anxious for a licking," but the greek tangle worried her beyond her powers of philosophy to endure calmly.
""constantine of greece has a german wife, mrs. dr. dear, and that fact squelches hope.
to think that i should have lived to care what kind of a wife constantine of greece had!
the miserable creature is under his wife's thumb and that is a bad place for any man to be.
i am an old maid and an old maid has to be independent or she will be squashed out.
but if i had been a married woman, mrs. dr. dear, i would have been meek and humble.
it is my opinion that this sophia of greece is a minx."
susan was furious when the news came that venizelos had met with defeat.
""i could spank constantine and skin him alive afterwards, that i could," she exclaimed bitterly.
""oh, susan, i'm surprised at you," said the doctor, pulling a long face.
""have you no regard for the proprieties?
skin him alive by all means but omit the spanking."
""if he had been well spanked in his younger days he might have more sense now," retorted susan.
""but i suppose princes are never spanked, more is the pity.
i see the allies have sent him an ultimatum.
i could tell them that it will take more than ultimatums to skin a snake like constantine.
perhaps the allied blockade will hammer sense into his head; but that will take some time i am thinking, and in the meantime what is to become of poor serbia?"
they saw what became of serbia, and during the process susan was hardly to be lived with.
in her exasperation she abused everything and everybody except kitchener, and she fell upon poor president wilson tooth and claw.
""if he had done his duty and gone into the war long ago we should not have seen this mess in serbia," she avowed.
""it would be a serious thing to plunge a great country like the united states, with its mixed population, into the war, susan," said the doctor, who sometimes came to the defence of the president, not because he thought wilson needed it especially, but from an unholy love of baiting susan.
""maybe, doctor dear -- maybe!
but that makes me think of the old story of the girl who told her grandmother she was going to be married.
"it is a solemn thing to be married," said the old lady.
"yes, but it is a solemner thing not to be," said the girl.
and i can testify to that out of my own experience, doctor dear.
and i think it is a solemner thing for the yankees that they have kept out of the war than it would have been if they had gone into it.
however, though i do not know much about them, i am of the opinion that we will see them starting something yet, woodrow wilson or no woodrow wilson, when they get it into their heads that this war is not a correspondence school.
they will not," said susan, energetically waving a saucepan with one hand and a soup ladle with the other, "be too proud to fight then."
on a pale-yellow, windy evening in october carl meredith went away.
he had enlisted on his eighteenth birthday.
john meredith saw him off with a set face.
his two boys were gone -- there was only little bruce left now.
he loved bruce and bruce's mother dearly; but jerry and carl were the sons of the bride of his youth and carl was the only one of all his children who had cecilia's very eyes.
as they looked lovingly out at him above carl's uniform the pale minister suddenly remembered the day when for the first and last time he had tried to whip carl for his prank with the eel.
that was the first time he had realised how much carl's eyes were like cecilia's.
now he realised it again once more.
would he ever again see his dead wife's eyes looking at him from his son's face?
what a bonny, clean, handsome lad he was!
it was -- hard -- to see him go.
john meredith seemed to be looking at a torn plain strewed with the bodies of "able-bodied men between the ages of eighteen and forty-five."
only the other day carl had been a little scrap of a boy, hunting bugs in rainbow valley, taking lizards to bed with him, and scandalizing the glen by carrying frogs to sunday school.
it seemed hardly -- right -- somehow that he should be an "able-bodied man" in khaki.
yet john meredith had said no word to dissuade him when carl had told him he must go.
rilla felt carl's going keenly.
they had always been cronies and playmates.
he was only a little older than she was and they had been children in rainbow valley together.
she recalled all their old pranks and escapades as she walked slowly home alone.
the full moon peeped through the scudding clouds with sudden floods of weird illumination, the telephone wires sang a shrill weird song in the wind, and the tall spikes of withered, grey-headed golden-rod in the fence corners swayed and beckoned wildly to her like groups of old witches weaving unholy spells.
on such a night as this, long ago, carl would come over to ingleside and whistle her out to the gate.
""let's go on a moon-spree, rilla," he would say, and the two of them would scamper off to rainbow valley.
rilla had never been afraid of his beetles and bugs, though she drew a hard and fast line at snakes.
they used to talk together of almost everything and were teased about each other at school; but one evening when they were about ten years of age they had solemnly promised, by the old spring in rainbow valley, that they would never marry each other.
alice clow had "crossed out" their names on her slate in school that day, and it came out that "both married."
they did not like the idea at all, hence the mutual vow in rainbow valley.
there was nothing like an ounce of prevention.
rilla laughed over the old memory -- and then sighed.
that very day a dispatch from some london paper had contained the cheerful announcement that "the present moment is the darkest since the war began."
it was dark enough, and rilla wished desperately that she could do something besides waiting and serving at home, as day after day the glen boys she had known went away.
if she were only a boy, speeding in khaki by carl's side to the western front!
she had wished that in a burst of romance when jem had gone, without, perhaps, really meaning it.
she meant it now.
there were moments when waiting at home, in safety and comfort, seemed an unendurable thing.
the moon burst triumphantly through an especially dark cloud and shadow and silver chased each other in waves over the glen.
rilla remembered one moonlit evening of childhood when she had said to her mother, "the moon just looks like a sorry, sorry face."
she thought it looked like that still -- an agonised, care-worn face, as though it looked down on dreadful sights.
what did it see on the western front?
in broken serbia?
on shell-swept gallipoli?
""i am tired," miss oliver had said that day, in a rare outburst of impatience, "of this horrible rack of strained emotions, when every day brings a new horror or the dread of it.
no, do n't look reproachfully at me, mrs. blythe.
there's nothing heroic about me today.
i've slumped.
i wish england had left belgium to her fate -- i wish canada had never sent a man -- i wish we'd tied our boys to our apron strings and not let one of them go.
oh -- i shall be ashamed of myself in half an hour -- but at this very minute i mean every word of it.
will the allies never strike?"
""patience is a tired mare but she jogs on," said susan.
""while the steeds of armageddon thunder, trampling over our hearts," retorted miss oliver.
""susan, tell me -- do n't you ever -- did n't you ever -- take spells of feeling that you must scream -- or swear -- or smash something -- just because your torture reaches a point when it becomes unbearable?"
""i have never sworn or desired to swear, miss oliver dear, but i will admit," said susan, with the air of one determined to make a clean breast of it once and for all, "that i have experienced occasions when it was a relief to do considerable banging."
""do n't you think that is a kind of swearing, susan?
what is the difference between slamming a door viciously and saying d --" "miss oliver dear," interrupted susan, desperately determined to save gertrude from herself, if human power could do it, "you are all tired out and unstrung -- and no wonder, teaching those obstreperous youngsters all day and coming home to bad war news.
but just you go upstairs and lie down and i will bring you up a cup of hot tea and a bite of toast and very soon you will not want to slam doors or swear."
""susan, you're a good soul -- a very pearl of susans!
but, susan, it would be such a relief -- to say just one soft, low, little tiny d --" "i will bring you a hot-water bottle for the soles of your feet, also," interposed susan resolutely, "and it would not be any relief to say that word you are thinking of, miss oliver, and that you may tie to."
""well, i'll try the hot-water bottle first," said miss oliver, repenting herself on teasing susan and vanishing upstairs, to susan's intense relief.
susan shook her head ominously as she filled the hot-water bottle.
the war was certainly relaxing the standards of behaviour woefully.
here was miss oliver admittedly on the point of profanity.
""we must draw the blood from her brain," said susan, "and if this bottle is not effective i will see what can be done with a mustard plaster."
gertrude rallied and carried on.
lord kitchener went to greece, whereat susan foretold that constantine would soon experience a change of heart.
lloyd george began to heckle the allies regarding equipment and guns and susan said you would hear more of lloyd george yet.
the gallant anzacs withdrew from gallipoli and susan approved the step, with reservations.
the siege of kut-el-amara began and susan pored over maps of mesopotamia and abused the turks.
henry ford started for europe and susan flayed him with sarcasm.
sir john french was superseded by sir douglas haig and susan dubiously opined that it was poor policy to swap horses crossing a stream, "though, to be sure, haig was a good name and french had a foreign sound, say what you might."
not a move on the great chess-board of king or bishop or pawn escaped susan, who had once read only glen st. mary notes.
""there was a time," she said sorrowfully, "when i did not care what happened outside of p.e. island, and now a king can not have a toothache in russia or china but it worries me.
it may be broadening to the mind, as the doctor said, but it is very painful to the feelings."
when christmas came again susan did not set any vacant places at the festive board.
two empty chairs were too much even for susan who had thought in september that there would not be one.
""this is the first christmas that walter was not home," rilla wrote in her diary that night.
""jem used to be away for christmases up in avonlea, but walter never was.
i had letters from ken and him today.
they are still in england but expect to be in the trenches very soon.
and then -- but i suppose we'll be able to endure it somehow.
to me, the strangest of all the strange things since 1914 is how we have all learned to accept things we never thought we could -- to go on with life as a matter of course.
i know that jem and jerry are in the trenches -- that ken and walter will be soon -- that if one of them does not come back my heart will break -- yet i go on and work and plan -- yes, and even enjoy life by times.
there are moments when we have real fun because, just for the moment, we do n't think about things and then -- we remember -- and the remembering is worse than thinking of it all the time would have been.
""today was dark and cloudy and tonight is wild enough, as gertrude says, to please any novelist in search of suitable matter for a murder or elopement.
the raindrops streaming over the panes look like tears running down a face, and the wind is shrieking through the maple grove.
""this has n't been a nice christmas day in any way.
nan had toothache and susan had red eyes, and assumed a weird and gruesome flippancy of manner to deceive us into thinking she had n't; and jims had a bad cold all day and i'm afraid of croup.
he has had croup twice since october.
the first time i was nearly frightened to death, for father and mother were both away -- father always is away, it seems to me, when any of this household gets sick.
but susan was cool as a fish and knew just what to do, and by morning jims was all right.
that child is a cross between a duck and an imp.
he's a year and four months old, trots about everywhere, and says quite a few words.
he has the cutest little way of calling me "willa-will."
it always brings back that dreadful, ridiculous, delightful night when ken came to say good-bye, and i was so furious and happy.
jims is pink and white and big-eyed and curly-haired and every now and then i discover a new dimple in him.
i can never quite believe he is really the same creature as that scrawny, yellow, ugly little changeling i brought home in the soup tureen.
nobody has ever heard a word from jim anderson.
if he never comes back i shall keep jims always.
everybody here worships and spoils him -- or would spoil him if morgan and i did n't stand remorselessly in the way.
susan says jims is the cleverest child she ever saw and can recognize old nick when he sees him -- this because jims threw poor doc out of an upstairs window one day.
doc turned into mr. hyde on his way down and landed in a currant bush, spitting and swearing.
i tried to console his inner cat with a saucer of milk but he would have none of it, and remained mr. hyde the rest of the day.
jims's latest exploit was to paint the cushion of the big arm-chair in the sun parlour with molasses; and before anybody found it out mrs. fred clow came in on red cross business and sat down on it.
her new silk dress was ruined and nobody could blame her for being vexed.
but she went into one of her tempers and said nasty things and gave me such slams about "spoiling" jims that i nearly boiled over, too.
but i kept the lid on till she had waddled away and then i exploded."
"the fat, clumsy, horrid old thing," i said -- and oh, what a satisfaction it was to say it."
"she has three sons at the front," mother said rebukingly.""
i suppose that covers all her shortcomings in manners," i retorted.
but i was ashamed -- for it is true that all her boys have gone and she was very plucky and loyal about it too; and she is a perfect tower of strength in the red cross.
it's a little hard to remember all the heroines.
just the same, it was her second new silk dress in one year and that when everybody is -- or should be -- trying to "save and serve."
""i had to bring out my green velvet hat again lately and begin wearing it.
i hung on to my blue straw sailor as long as i could.
how i hate the green velvet hat!
it is so elaborate and conspicuous.
i do n't see how i could ever have liked it.
but i vowed to wear it and wear it i will.
""shirley and i went down to the station this morning to take little dog monday a bang-up christmas dinner.
dog monday waits and watches there still, with just as much hope and confidence as ever.
sometimes he hangs around the station house and talks to people and the rest of his time he sits at his little kennel door and watches the track unwinkingly.
we never try to coax him home now: we know it is of no use.
when jem comes back, monday will come home with him; and if jem -- never comes back -- monday will wait there for him as long as his dear dog heart goes on beating.
""fred arnold was here last night.
he was eighteen in november and is going to enlist just as soon as his mother is over an operation she has to have.
he has been coming here very often lately and though i like him so much it makes me uncomfortable, because i am afraid he is thinking that perhaps i could care something for him.
i ca n't tell him about ken -- because, after all, what is there to tell?
and yet i do n't like to behave coldly and distantly when he will be going away so soon.
it is very perplexing.
i remember i used to think it would be such fun to have dozens of beaux -- and now i'm worried to death because two are too many.
""i am learning to cook.
susan is teaching me.
i tried to learn long ago -- but no, let me be honest -- susan tried to teach me, which is a very different thing.
i never seemed to succeed with anything and i got discouraged.
but since the boys have gone away i wanted to be able to make cake and things for them myself and so i started in again and this time i'm getting on surprisingly well.
susan says it is all in the way i hold my mouth and father says my subconscious mind is desirous of learning now, and i dare say they're both right.
anyhow, i can make dandy short-bread and fruitcake.
i got ambitious last week and attempted cream puffs, but made an awful failure of them.
they came out of the oven flat as flukes.
i thought maybe the cream would fill them up again and make them plump but it did n't.
i think susan was secretly pleased.
she is past mistress in the art of making cream puffs and it would break her heart if anyone else here could make them as well.
i wonder if susan tampered -- but no, i wo n't suspect her of such a thing.
""miranda pryor spent an afternoon here a few days ago, helping me cut out certain red cross garments known by the charming name of "vermin shirts."
susan thinks that name is not quite decent, so i suggested she call them "cootie sarks," which is old highland sandy's version of it.
but she shook her head and i heard her telling mother later that, in her opinion, "cooties" and "sarks" were not proper subjects for young girls to talk about.
she was especially horrified when jem wrote in his last letter to mother, "tell susan i had a fine cootie hunt this morning and caught fifty-three!"
susan positively turned pea-green.
"mrs. dr. dear," she said, "when i was young, if decent people were so unfortunate as to get -- those insects -- they kept it a secret if possible.
i do not want to be narrow-minded, mrs. dr. dear, but i still think it is better not to mention such things."
""miranda grew confidential over our vermin shirts and told me all her troubles.
she is desperately unhappy.
she is engaged to joe milgrave and joe joined up in october and has been training in charlottetown ever since.
her father was furious when he joined and forbade miranda ever to have any dealing or communication with him again.
poor joe expects to go overseas any day and wants miranda to marry him before he goes, which shows that there have been "communications" in spite of whiskers-on-the-moon.
miranda wants to marry him but can not, and she declares it will break her heart."
"why do n't you run away and marry him?"
i said.
it did n't go against my conscience in the least to give her such advice.
joe milgrave is a splendid fellow and mr. pryor fairly beamed on him until the war broke out and i know mr. pryor would forgive miranda very quickly, once it was over and he wanted his housekeeper back.
but miranda shook her silvery head dolefully."
"joe wants me to but i ca n't.
mother's last words to me, as she lay on her dying-bed, were, "never, never run away, miranda," and i promised."
""miranda's mother died two years ago, and it seems, according to miranda, that her mother and father actually ran away to be married themselves.
to picture whiskers-on-the-moon as the hero of an elopement is beyond my power.
but such was the case and mrs. pryor at least lived to repent it.
she had a hard life of it with mr. pryor, and she thought it was a punishment on her for running away.
so she made miranda promise she would never, for any reason whatever, do it.
""of course, you can not urge a girl to break a promise made to a dying mother, so i did not see what miranda could do unless she got joe to come to the house when her father was away and marry her there.
but miranda said that could n't be managed.
her father seemed to suspect she might be up to something of the sort and he never went away for long at a time, and, of course, joe could n't get leave of absence at an hour's notice."
"no, i shall just have to let joe go, and he will be killed -- i know he will be killed -- and my heart will break," said miranda, her tears running down and copiously bedewing the vermin shirts!
""i am not writing like this for lack of any real sympathy with poor miranda.
i've just got into the habit of giving things a comical twist if i can, when i'm writing to jem and walter and ken, to make them laugh.
i really felt sorry for miranda who is as much in love with joe as a china-blue girl can be with anyone and who is dreadfully ashamed of her father's pro-german sentiments.
i think she understood that i did, for she said she had wanted to tell me all about her worries because i had grown so sympathetic this past year.
i wonder if i have.
i know i used to be a selfish, thoughtless creature -- how selfish and thoughtless i am ashamed to remember now, so i ca n't be quite so bad as i was.
""i wish i could help miranda.
it would be very romantic to contrive a war-wedding and i should dearly love to get the better of whiskers-on-the-moon.
but at present the oracle has not spoken."
chapter xviii a war-wedding "i can tell you this dr. dear," said susan, pale with wrath, "that germany is getting to be perfectly ridiculous."
they were all in the big ingleside kitchen.
susan was mixing biscuits for supper.
mrs. blythe was making shortbread for jem, and rilla was compounding candy for ken and walter -- it had once been "walter and ken" in her thoughts but somehow, quite unconsciously, this had changed until ken's name came naturally first.
cousin sophia was also there, knitting.
all the boys were going to be killed in the long run, so cousin sophia felt in her bones, but they might better die with warm feet than cold ones, so cousin sophia knitted faithfully and gloomily.
into this peaceful scene erupted the doctor, wrathful and excited over the burning of the parliament buildings in ottawa.
and susan became automatically quite as wrathful and excited.
""what will those huns do next?"
she demanded.
""coming over here and burning our parliament building!
did anyone ever hear of such an outrage?"
""we do n't know that the germans are responsible for this," said the doctor -- much as if he felt quite sure they were.
""fires do start without their agency sometimes.
and uncle mark macallister's barn was burnt last week.
you can hardly accuse the germans of that, susan."
""indeed, dr. dear, i do not know."
susan nodded slowly and portentously.
""whiskers-on-the-moon was there that very day.
the fire broke out half an hour after he was gone.
so much is a fact -- but i shall not accuse a presbyterian elder of burning anybody's barn until i have proof.
however, everybody knows, dr. dear, that both uncle mark's boys have enlisted, and that uncle mark himself makes speeches at all the recruiting meetings.
so no doubt germany is anxious to get square with him."
""i could never speak at a recruiting meeting," said cousin sophia solemnly.
""i could never reconcile it to my conscience to ask another woman's son to go, to murder and be murdered."
""could you not?"
said susan.
""well, sophia crawford, i felt as if i could ask anyone to go when i read last night that there were no children under eight years of age left alive in poland.
think of that, sophia crawford" -- susan shook a floury finger at sophia -- "not -- one -- child -- under -- eight -- years -- of -- age!"
""i suppose the germans has et'em all," sighed cousin sophia.
""well, no-o-o," said susan reluctantly, as if she hated to admit that there was any crime the huns could n't be accused of.
""the germans have not turned cannibal yet -- as far as i know.
they have died of starvation and exposure, the poor little creatures.
there is murdering for you, cousin sophia crawford.
the thought of it poisons every bite and sup i take."
""i see that fred carson of lowbridge has been awarded a distinguished conduct medal," remarked the doctor, over his local paper.
""i heard that last week," said susan.
""he is a battalion runner and he did something extra brave and daring.
his letter, telling his folks about it, came when his old grandmother carson was on her dying-bed.
she had only a few minutes more to live and the episcopal minister, who was there, asked her if she would not like him to pray.
"oh yes, yes, you can pray," she said impatient-like -- she was a dean, dr. dear, and the deans were always high-spirited -- "you can pray, but for pity's sake pray low and do n't disturb me.
i want to think over this splendid news and i have not much time left to do it."
that was almira carson all over.
fred was the apple of her eye.
she was seventy-five years of age and had not a grey hair in her head, they tell me."
""by the way, that reminds me -- i found a grey hair this morning -- my very first," said mrs. blythe.
""i have noticed that grey hair for some time, mrs. dr. dear, but i did not speak of it.
thought i to myself, "she has enough to bear."
but now that you have discovered it let me remind you that grey hairs are honourable."
""i must be getting old, gilbert."
mrs. blythe laughed a trifle ruefully.
""people are beginning to tell me i look so young.
they never tell you that when you are young.
but i shall not worry over my silver thread.
i never liked red hair.
gilbert, did i ever tell you of that time, years ago at green gables, when i dyed my hair?
nobody but marilla and i knew about it."
""was that the reason you came out once with your hair shingled to the bone?"
""yes.
i bought a bottle of dye from a german jew pedlar.
i fondly expected it would turn my hair black -- and it turned it green.
so it had to be cut off."
""you had a narrow escape, mrs. dr. dear," exclaimed susan.
""of course you were too young then to know what a german was.
it was a special mercy of providence that it was only green dye and not poison."
""it seems hundreds of years since those green gables days," sighed mrs. blythe.
""they belonged to another world altogether.
life has been cut in two by the chasm of war.
what is ahead i do n't know -- but it ca n't be a bit like the past.
i wonder if those of us who have lived half our lives in the old world will ever feel wholly at home in the new."
""have you noticed," asked miss oliver, glancing up from her book, "how everything written before the war seems so far away now, too?
one feels as if one was reading something as ancient as the iliad.
this poem of wordsworth's -- the senior class have it in their entrance work -- i've been glancing over it.
its classic calm and repose and the beauty of the lines seem to belong to another planet, and to have as little to do with the present world-welter as the evening star."
""the only thing that i find much comfort in reading nowadays is the bible," remarked susan, whisking her biscuits into the oven.
""there are so many passages in it that seem to me exactly descriptive of the huns.
old highland sandy declares that there is no doubt that the kaiser is the anti-christ spoken of in revelations, but i do not go as far as that.
it would, in my humble opinion, mrs. dr. dear, be too great an honour for him."
early one morning, several days later, miranda pryor slipped up to ingleside, ostensibly to get some red cross sewing, but in reality to talk over with sympathetic rilla troubles that were past bearing alone.
she brought her dog with her -- an over-fed, bandy-legged little animal very dear to her heart because joe milgrave had given it to her when it was a puppy.
mr. pryor regarded all dogs with disfavour; but in those days he had looked kindly upon joe as a suitor for miranda's hand and so he had allowed her to keep the puppy.
miranda was so grateful that she endeavoured to please her father by naming her dog after his political idol, the great liberal chieftain, sir wilfrid laurier -- though his title was soon abbreviated to wilfy.
sir wilfrid grew and flourished and waxed fat; but miranda spoiled him absurdly and nobody else liked him.
rilla especially hated him because of his detestable trick of lying flat on his back and entreating you with waving paws to tickle his sleek stomach.
when she saw that miranda's pale eyes bore unmistakable testimony of her having cried all night, rilla asked her to come up to her room, knowing miranda had a tale of woe to tell, but she ordered sir wilfrid to remain below.
""oh, ca n't he come, too?"
said miranda wistfully.
""poor wilfy wo n't be any bother -- and i wiped his paws so carefully before i brought him in.
he is always so lonesome in a strange place without me -- and very soon he'll be -- all -- i'll have left -- to remind me -- of joe."
rilla yielded, and sir wilfrid, with his tail curled at a saucy angle over his brindled back, trotted triumphantly up the stairs before them.
""oh, rilla," sobbed miranda, when they had reached sanctuary.
""i'm so unhappy.
i ca n't begin to tell you how unhappy i am.
truly, my heart is breaking."
rilla sat down on the lounge beside her.
sir wilfrid squatted on his haunches before them, with his impertinent pink tongue stuck out, and listened.
""what is the trouble, miranda?"
""joe is coming home tonight on his last leave.
i had a letter from him on saturday -- he sends my letters in care of bob crawford, you know, because of father -- and, oh, rilla, he will only have four days -- he has to go away friday morning -- and i may never see him again."
""does he still want you to marry him?"
asked rilla.
""oh, yes.
he implored me in his letter to run away and be married.
but i can not do that, rilla, not even for joe.
my only comfort is that i will be able to see him for a little while tomorrow afternoon.
father has to go to charlottetown on business.
at least we will have one good farewell talk.
but oh -- afterwards -- why, rilla, i know father wo n't even let me go to the station friday morning to see joe off."
""why in the world do n't you and joe get married tomorrow afternoon at home?"
demanded rilla.
miranda swallowed a sob in such amazement that she almost choked.
""why -- why -- that is impossible, rilla."
""why?"
briefly demanded the organizer of the junior red cross and the transporter of babies in soup tureens.
""why -- why -- we never thought of such a thing -- joe has n't a license -- i have no dress -- i could n't be married in black -- i -- i -- we -- you -- you --" miranda lost herself altogether and sir wilfrid, seeing that she was in dire distress threw back his head and emitted a melancholy yelp.
rilla blythe thought hard and rapidly for a few minutes.
then she said, "miranda, if you will put yourself into my hands i'll have you married to joe before four o'clock tomorrow afternoon."
""oh, you could n't."
""i can and i will.
but you'll have to do exactly as i tell you."
""oh -- i -- do n't think -- oh, father will kill me --" "nonsense.
he'll be very angry i suppose.
but are you more afraid of your father's anger than you are of joe's never coming back to you?"
""no," said miranda, with sudden firmness, "i'm not."
""will you do as i tell you then?"
""yes, i will."
""then get joe on the long-distance at once and tell him to bring out a license and ring tonight."
""oh, i could n't," wailed the aghast miranda, "it -- it would be so -- so indelicate."
rilla shut her little white teeth together with a snap.
""heaven grant me patience," she said under her breath.
""i'll do it then," she said aloud, "and meanwhile, you go home and make what preparations you can.
when i "phone down to you to come up and help me sew come at once."
as soon as miranda, pallid, scared, but desperately resolved, had gone, rilla flew to the telephone and put in a long-distance call for charlottetown.
she got through with such surprising quickness that she was convinced providence approved of her undertaking, but it was a good hour before she could get in touch with joe milgrave at his camp.
meanwhile, she paced impatiently about, and prayed that when she did get joe there would be no listeners on the line to carry news to whiskers-on-the-moon.
""is that you, joe?
rilla blythe is speaking -- rilla -- rilla -- oh, never mind.
listen to this.
before you come home tonight get a marriage license -- a marriage license -- yes, a marriage license -- and a wedding-ring.
did you get that?
and will you do it?
very well, be sure you do it -- it is your only chance."
flushed with triumph -- for her only fear was that she might not be able to locate joe in time -- rilla rang the pryor ring.
this time she had not such good luck for she drew whiskers-on-the-moon.
""is that miranda?
oh -- mr. pryor!
well, mr. pryor, will you kindly ask miranda if she can come up this afternoon and help me with some sewing.
it is very important, or i would not trouble her.
oh -- thank you."
mr. pryor had consented somewhat grumpily, but he had consented -- he did not want to offend dr. blythe, and he knew that if he refused to allow miranda to do any red cross work public opinion would make the glen too hot for comfort.
rilla went out to the kitchen, shut all the doors with a mysterious expression which alarmed susan, and then said solemnly, "susan can you make a wedding-cake this afternoon?"
""a wedding-cake!"
susan stared.
rilla had, without any warning, brought her a war-baby once upon a time.
was she now, with equal suddenness, going to produce a husband?
""yes, a wedding-cake -- a scrumptious wedding-cake, susan -- a beautiful, plummy, eggy, citron-peely wedding-cake.
and we must make other things too.
i'll help you in the morning.
but i ca n't help you in the afternoon for i have to make a wedding-dress and time is the essence of the contract, susan."
susan felt that she was really too old to be subjected to such shocks.
""who are you going to marry, rilla?"
she asked feebly.
""susan, darling, i am not the happy bride.
miranda pryor is going to marry joe milgrave tomorrow afternoon while her father is away in town.
a war-wedding, susan -- is n't that thrilling and romantic?
i never was so excited in my life."
the excitement soon spread over ingleside, infecting even mrs. blythe and susan.
""i'll go to work on that cake at once," vowed susan, with a glance at the clock.
""mrs. dr. dear, will you pick over the fruit and beat up the eggs?
if you will i can have that cake ready for the oven by the evening.
tomorrow morning we can make salads and other things.
i will work all night if necessary to get the better of whiskers-on-the-moon."
miranda arrived, tearful and breathless.
""we must fix over my white dress for you to wear," said rilla.
""it will fit you very nicely with a little alteration."
to work went the two girls, ripping, fitting, basting, sewing for dear life.
by dint of unceasing effort they got the dress done by seven o'clock and miranda tried it on in rilla's room.
""it's very pretty -- but oh, if i could just have a veil," sighed miranda.
""i've always dreamed of being married in a lovely white veil."
some good fairy evidently waits on the wishes of war-brides.
the door opened and mrs. blythe came in, her arms full of a filmy burden.
""miranda dear," she said, "i want you to wear my wedding-veil tomorrow.
it is twenty-four years since i was a bride at old green gables -- the happiest bride that ever was -- and the wedding-veil of a happy bride brings good luck, they say."
""oh, how sweet of you, mrs. blythe," said miranda, the ready tears starting to her eyes.
the veil was tried on and draped.
susan dropped in to approve but dared not linger.
""i've got that cake in the oven," she said, "and i am pursuing a policy of watchful waiting.
the evening news is that the grand duke has captured erzerum.
that is a pill for the turks.
i wish i had a chance to tell the czar just what a mistake he made when he turned nicholas down."
susan disappeared downstairs to the kitchen, whence a dreadful thud and a piercing shriek presently sounded.
everybody rushed to the kitchen -- the doctor and miss oliver, mrs. blythe, rilla, miranda in her wedding-veil.
susan was sitting flatly in the middle of the kitchen floor with a dazed, bewildered look on her face, while doc, evidently in his hyde incarnation, was standing on the dresser, with his back up, his eyes blazing, and his tail the size of three tails.
""susan, what has happened?"
cried mrs. blythe in alarm.
""did you fall?
are you hurt?"
susan picked herself up.
""no," she said grimly, "i am not hurt, though i am jarred all over.
do not be alarmed.
as for what has happened -- i tried to kick that darned cat with both feet, that is what happened."
everybody shrieked with laughter.
the doctor was quite helpless.
""oh, susan, susan," he gasped.
""that i should live to hear you swear."
""i am sorry," said susan in real distress, "that i used such an expression before two young girls.
but i said that beast was darned, and darned it is.
it belongs to old nick."
""do you expect it will vanish some of these days with a bang and the odour of brimstone, susan?"
""it will go to its own place in due time and that you may tie to," said susan dourly, shaking out her raddled bones and going to her oven.
""i suppose my plunking down like that has shaken my cake so that it will be as heavy as lead."
but the cake was not heavy.
it was all a bride's cake should be, and susan iced it beautifully.
next day she and rilla worked all the forenoon, making delicacies for the wedding-feast, and as soon as miranda phoned up that her father was safely off everything was packed in a big hamper and taken down to the pryor house.
joe soon arrived in his uniform and a state of violent excitement, accompanied by his best man, sergeant malcolm crawford.
there were quite a few guests, for all the manse and ingleside folk were there, and a dozen or so of joe's relatives, including his mother, "mrs. dead angus milgrave," so called, cheerfully, to distinguish her from another lady whose angus was living.
mrs. dead angus wore a rather disapproving expression, not caring over-much for this alliance with the house of whiskers-on-the-moon.
so miranda pryor was married to private joseph milgrave on his last leave.
it should have been a romantic wedding but it was not.
there were too many factors working against romance, as even rilla had to admit.
in the first place, miranda, in spite of her dress and veil, was such a flat-faced, commonplace, uninteresting little bride.
in the second place, joe cried bitterly all through the ceremony, and this vexed miranda unreasonably.
long afterwards she told rilla, "i just felt like saying to him then and there, "if you feel so bad over having to marry me you do n't have to."
but it was just because he was thinking all the time of how soon he would have to leave me."
in the third place, jims, who was usually so well-behaved in public, took a fit of shyness and contrariness combined and began to cry at the top of his voice for "willa."
nobody wanted to take him out, because everybody wanted to see the marriage, so rilla who was a bridesmaid, had to take him and hold him during the ceremony.
in the fourth place, sir wilfrid laurier took a fit.
sir wilfrid was entrenched in a corner of the room behind miranda's piano.
during his seizure he made the weirdest, most unearthly noises.
he would begin with a series of choking, spasmodic sounds, continuing into a gruesome gurgle, and ending up with a strangled howl.
nobody could hear a word mr. meredith was saying, except now and then, when sir wilfrid stopped for breath.
nobody looked at the bride except susan, who never dragged her fascinated eyes from miranda's face -- all the others were gazing at the dog.
miranda had been trembling with nervousness but as soon as sir wilfrid began his performance she forgot it.
all that she could think of was that her dear dog was dying and she could not go to him.
she never remembered a word of the ceremony.
rilla, who in spite of jims, had been trying her best to look rapt and romantic, as beseemed a war bridesmaid, gave up the hopeless attempt, and devoted her energies to choking down untimely merriment.
she dared not look at anybody in the room, especially mrs. dead angus, for fear all her suppressed mirth should suddenly explode in a most un-young-ladylike yell of laughter.
but married they were, and then they had a wedding-supper in the dining-room which was so lavish and bountiful that you would have thought it was the product of a month's labour.
everybody had brought something.
mrs. dead angus had brought a large apple-pie, which she placed on a chair in the dining-room and then absently sat down on it.
neither her temper nor her black silk wedding garment was improved thereby, but the pie was never missed at the gay bridal feast.
mrs. dead angus eventually took it home with her again.
whiskers-on-the-moon's pacifist pig should not get it, anyhow.
that evening mr. and mrs. joe, accompanied by the recovered sir wilfrid, departed for the four winds lighthouse, which was kept by joe's uncle and in which they meant to spend their brief honeymoon.
una meredith and rilla and susan washed the dishes, tidied up, left a cold supper and miranda's pitiful little note on the table for mr. pryor, and walked home, while the mystic veil of dreamy, haunted winter twilight wrapped itself over the glen.
""i would really not have minded being a war-bride myself," remarked susan sentimentally.
but rilla felt rather flat -- perhaps as a reaction to all the excitement and rush of the past thirty-six hours.
she was disappointed somehow -- the whole affair had been so ludicrous, and miranda and joe so lachrymose and commonplace.
""if miranda had n't given that wretched dog such an enormous dinner he would n't have had that fit," she said crossly.
""i warned her -- but she said she could n't starve the poor dog -- he would soon be all she had left, etc..
i could have shaken her."
""the best man was more excited than joe was," said susan.
""he wished miranda many happy returns of the day.
she did not look very happy, but perhaps you could not expect that under the circumstances."
""anyhow," thought rilla, "i can write a perfectly killing account of it all to the boys.
how jem will howl over sir wilfrid's part in it!"
but if rilla was rather disappointed in the war wedding she found nothing lacking on friday morning when miranda said good-bye to her bridegroom at the glen station.
the dawn was white as a pearl, clear as a diamond.
behind the station the balsamy copse of young firs was frost-misted.
the cold moon of dawn hung over the westering snow fields but the golden fleeces of sunrise shone above the maples up at ingleside.
joe took his pale little bride in his arms and she lifted her face to his.
rilla choked suddenly.
it did not matter that miranda was insignificant and commonplace and flat-featured.
it did not matter that she was the daughter of whiskers-on-the-moon.
all that mattered was that rapt, sacrificial look in her eyes -- that ever-burning, sacred fire of devotion and loyalty and fine courage that she was mutely promising joe she and thousands of other women would keep alive at home while their men held the western front.
rilla walked away, realising that she must not spy on such a moment.
she went down to the end of the platform where sir wilfrid and dog monday were sitting, looking at each other.
sir wilfrid remarked condescendingly: "why do you haunt this old shed when you might lie on the hearthrug at ingleside and live on the fat of the land?
is it a pose?
or a fixed idea?"
whereat dog monday, laconically: "i have a tryst to keep."
when the train had gone rilla rejoined the little trembling miranda.
""well, he's gone," said miranda, "and he may never come back -- but i'm his wife, and i'm going to be worthy of him.
i'm going home."
""do n't you think you had better come with me now?"
asked rilla doubtfully.
nobody knew yet how mr. pryor had taken the matter.
""no.
if joe can face the huns i guess i can face father," said miranda daringly.
""a soldier's wife ca n't be a coward.
come on, wilfy.
i'll go straight home and meet the worst."
there was nothing very dreadful to face, however.
perhaps mr. pryor had reflected that housekeepers were hard to get and that there were many milgrave homes open to miranda -- also, that there was such a thing as a separation allowance.
at all events, though he told her grumpily that she had made a nice fool of herself, and would live to regret it, he said nothing worse, and mrs. joe put on her apron and went to work as usual, while sir wilfrid laurier, who had a poor opinion of lighthouses for winter residences, went to sleep in his pet nook behind the woodbox, a thankful dog that he was done with war-weddings.
chapter xix "they shall not pass" one cold grey morning in february gertrude oliver wakened with a shiver, slipped into rilla's room, and crept in beside her.
""rilla -- i'm frightened -- frightened as a baby -- i've had another of my strange dreams.
something terrible is before us -- i know."
""what was it?"
asked rilla.
""i was standing again on the veranda steps -- just as i stood in that dream on the night before the lighthouse dance, and in the sky a huge black, menacing thunder cloud rolled up from the east.
i could see its shadow racing before it and when it enveloped me i shivered with icy cold.
then the storm broke -- and it was a dreadful storm -- blinding flash after flash and deafening peal after peal, driving torrents of rain.
i turned in panic and tried to run for shelter, and as i did so a man -- a soldier in the uniform of a french army officer -- dashed up the steps and stood beside me on the threshold of the door.
his clothes were soaked with blood from a wound in his breast, he seemed spent and exhausted; but his white face was set and his eyes blazed in his hollow face.
"they shall not pass," he said, in low, passionate tones which i heard distinctly amid all the turmoil of the storm.
then i awakened.
rilla, i'm frightened -- the spring will not bring the big push we've all been hoping for -- instead it is going to bring some dreadful blow to france.
i am sure of it.
the germans will try to smash through somewhere."
""but he told you that they would not pass," said rilla, seriously.
she never laughed at gertrude's dreams as the doctor did.
""i do not know if that was prophecy or desperation, rilla, the horror of that dream holds me yet in an icy grip.
we shall need all our courage before long."
dr. blythe did laugh at the breakfast table -- but he never laughed at miss oliver's dreams again; for that day brought news of the opening of the verdun offensive, and thereafter through all the beautiful weeks of spring the ingleside family, one and all, lived in a trance of dread.
there were days when they waited in despair for the end as foot by foot the germans crept nearer and nearer to the grim barrier of desperate france.
susan's deeds were in her spotless kitchen at ingleside, but her thoughts were on the hills around verdun.
""mrs. dr. dear," she would stick her head in at mrs. blythe's door the last thing at night to remark, "i do hope the french have hung onto the crow's wood today," and she woke at dawn to wonder if dead man's hill -- surely named by some prophet -- was still held by the "poyloos."
susan could have drawn a map of the country around verdun that would have satisfied a chief of staff.
""if the germans capture verdun the spirit of france will be broken," miss oliver said bitterly.
""but they will not capture it," staunchly said susan, who could not eat her dinner that day for fear lest they do that very thing.
""in the first place, you dreamed they would not -- you dreamed the very thing the french are saying before they ever said it -- "they shall not pass."
i declare to you, miss oliver, dear, when i read that in the paper, and remembered your dream, i went cold all over with awe.
it seemed to me like biblical times when people dreamed things like that quite frequently.
""i know -- i know," said gertrude, walking restlessly about.
""i cling to a persistent faith in my dream, too -- but every time bad news comes it fails me.
then i tell myself "mere coincidence" -- "subconscious memory" and so forth."
""i do not see how any memory could remember a thing before it was ever said at all," persisted susan, "though of course i am not educated like you and the doctor.
i would rather not be, if it makes anything as simple as that so hard to believe.
but in any case we need not worry over verdun, even if the huns get it.
joffre says it has no military significance."
""that old sop of comfort has been served up too often already when reverses came," retorted gertrude.
""it has lost its power to charm."
""was there ever a battle like this in the world before?"
said mr. meredith, one evening in mid-april.
""it's such a titanic thing we ca n't grasp it," said the doctor.
""what were the scraps of a few homeric handfuls compared to this?
the whole trojan war might be fought around a verdun fort and a newspaper correspondent would give it no more than a sentence.
i am not in the confidence of the occult powers" -- the doctor threw gertrude a twinkle -- "but i have a hunch that the fate of the whole war hangs on the issue of verdun.
as susan and joffre say, it has no real military significance; but it has the tremendous significance of an idea.
if germany wins there she will win the war.
if she loses, the tide will set against her."
""lose she will," said mr. meredith: emphatically.
""the idea can not be conquered.
france is certainly very wonderful.
it seems to me that in her i see the white form of civilization making a determined stand against the black powers of barbarism.
i think our whole world realizes this and that is why we all await the issue so breathlessly.
it is n't merely the question of a few forts changing hands or a few miles of blood-soaked ground lost and won."
""i wonder," said gertrude dreamily, "if some great blessing, great enough for the price, will be the meed of all our pain?
is the agony in which the world is shuddering the birth-pang of some wondrous new era?
or is it merely a futile struggle of ants in the gleam of a million million of suns?
we think very lightly, mr. meredith, of a calamity which destroys an ant-hill and half its inhabitants.
does the power that runs the universe think us of more importance than we think ants?"
""you forget," said mr. meredith, with a flash of his dark eyes, "that an infinite power must be infinitely little as well as infinitely great.
we are neither, therefore there are things too little as well as too great for us to apprehend.
to the infinitely little an ant is of as much importance as a mastodon.
we are witnessing the birth-pangs of a new era -- but it will be born a feeble, wailing life like everything else.
i am not one of those who expect a new heaven and a new earth as the immediate result of this war.
that is not the way god works.
but work he does, miss oliver, and in the end his purpose will be fulfilled."
""sound and orthodox -- sound and orthodox," muttered susan approvingly in the kitchen.
susan liked to see miss oliver sat upon by the minister now and then.
susan was very fond of her but she thought miss oliver liked saying heretical things to ministers far too well, and deserved an occasional reminder that these matters were quite beyond her province.
in may walter wrote home that he had been awarded a d.c. medal.
he did not say what for, but the other boys took care that the glen should know the brave thing walter had done.
""in any war but this," wrote jerry meredith, "it would have meant a v.c..
but they ca n't make v.c.'s as common as the brave things done every day here."
""he should have had the v.c.," said susan, and was very indignant over it.
she was not quite sure who was to blame for his not getting it, but if it were general haig she began for the first time to entertain serious doubts as to his fitness for being commander-in-chief.
rilla was beside herself with delight.
it was her dear walter who had done this thing -- walter, to whom someone had sent a white feather at redmond -- it was walter who had dashed back from the safety of the trench to drag in a wounded comrade who had fallen on no-man's - land.
oh, she could see his white beautiful face and wonderful eyes as he did it!
what a thing to be the sister of such a hero!
and he had n't thought it worth while writing about.
his letter was full of other things -- little intimate things that they two had known and loved together in the dear old cloudless days of a century ago.
""i've been thinking of the daffodils in the garden at ingleside," he wrote.
""by the time you get this they will be out, blowing there under that lovely rosy sky.
are they really as bright and golden as ever, rilla?
it seems to me that they must be dyed red with blood -- like our poppies here.
and every whisper of spring will be falling as a violet in rainbow valley.
""there is a young moon tonight -- a slender, silver, lovely thing hanging over these pits of torment.
will you see it tonight over the maple grove?
""i'm enclosing a little scrap of verse, rilla.
i wrote it one evening in my trench dug-out by the light of a bit of candle -- or rather it came to me there -- i did n't feel as if i were writing it -- something seemed to use me as an instrument.
i've had that feeling once or twice before, but very rarely and never so strongly as this time.
that was why i sent it over to the london spectator.
it printed it and the copy came today.
i hope you'll like it.
it's the only poem i've written since i came overseas."
the poem was a short, poignant little thing.
in a month it had carried walter's name to every corner of the globe.
everywhere it was copied -- in metropolitan dailies and little village weeklies -- in profound reviews and "agony columns," in red cross appeals and government recruiting propaganda.
mothers and sisters wept over it, young lads thrilled to it, the whole great heart of humanity caught it up as an epitome of all the pain and hope and pity and purpose of the mighty conflict, crystallized in three brief immortal verses.
a canadian lad in the flanders trenches had written the one great poem of the war.
""the piper," by pte..
walter blythe, was a classic from its first printing.
rilla copied it in her diary at the beginning of an entry in which she poured out the story of the hard week that had just passed.
""it has been such a dreadful week," she wrote, "and even though it is over and we know that it was all a mistake that does not seem to do away with the bruises left by it.
and yet it has in some ways been a very wonderful week and i have had some glimpses of things i never realized before -- of how fine and brave people can be even in the midst of horrible suffering.
i am sure i could never be as splendid as miss oliver was.
""just a week ago today she had a letter from mr. grant's mother in charlottetown.
and it told her that a cable had just come saying that major robert grant had been killed in action a few days before.
""oh, poor gertrude!
at first she was crushed.
then after just a day she pulled herself together and went back to her school.
she did not cry -- i never saw her shed a tear -- but oh, her face and her eyes!""
i must go on with my work," she said.
"that is my duty just now."
""i could never have risen to such a height.
""she never spoke bitterly except once, when susan said something about spring being here at last, and gertrude said," "can the spring really come this year?"
""then she laughed -- such a dreadful little laugh, just as one might laugh in the face of death, i think, and said," "observe my egotism.
because i, gertrude oliver, have lost a friend, it is incredible that the spring can come as usual.
the spring does not fail because of the million agonies of others -- but for mine -- oh, can the universe go on?""
"do n't feel bitter with yourself, dear," mother said gently.
"it is a very natural thing to feel as if things could n't go on just the same when some great blow has changed the world for us.
we all feel like that."
""then that horrid old cousin sophia of susan's piped up.
she was sitting there, knitting and croaking like an old "raven of bode and woe" as walter used to call her."
"you ai n't as bad off as some, miss oliver," she said, "and you should n't take it so hard.
there's some as has lost their husbands; that's a hard blow; and there's some as has lost their sons.
you have n't lost either husband or son.""
"no," said gertrude, more bitterly still.
"it's true i have n't lost a husband -- i have only lost the man who would have been my husband.
i have lost no son -- only the sons and daughters who might have been born to me -- who will never be born to me now.""
"it is n't ladylike to talk like that," said cousin sophia in a shocked tone; and then gertrude laughed right out, so wildly that cousin sophia was really frightened.
and when poor tortured gertrude, unable to endure it any longer, hurried out of the room, cousin sophia asked mother if the blow had n't affected miss oliver's mind.""
i suffered the loss of two good kind partners," she said, "but it did not affect me like that."
""i should think it would n't!
those poor men must have been thankful to die.
""i heard gertrude walking up and down her room most of the night.
she walked like that every night.
but never so long as that night.
and once i heard her give a dreadful sudden little cry as if she had been stabbed.
i could n't sleep for suffering with her; and i could n't help her.
i thought the night would never end.
but it did; and then "joy came in the morning" as the bible says.
only it did n't come exactly in the morning but well along in the afternoon.
the telephone rang and i answered it.
it was old mrs. grant speaking from charlottetown, and her news was that it was all a mistake -- robert was n't killed at all; he had only been slightly wounded in the arm and was safe in the hospital out of harm's way for a time anyhow.
they had n't learned yet how the mistake had happened but supposed there must have been another robert grant.
""i hung up the telephone and flew to rainbow valley.
i'm sure i did fly -- i ca n't remember my feet ever touching the ground.
i met gertrude on her way home from school in the glade of spruces where we used to play, and i just gasped out the news to her.
i ought to have had more sense, of course.
but i was so crazy with joy and excitement that i never stopped to think.
gertrude just dropped there among the golden young ferns as if she had been shot.
the fright it gave me ought to make me sensible -- in this respect at least -- for the rest of my life.
i thought i had killed her -- i remembered that her mother had died very suddenly from heart failure when quite a young woman.
it seemed years to me before i discovered that her heart was still beating.
a pretty time i had!
i never saw anybody faint before, and i knew there was nobody up at the house to help, because everybody else had gone to the station to meet di and nan coming home from redmond.
but i knew -- theoretically -- how people in a faint should be treated, and now i know it practically.
luckily the brook was handy, and after i had worked frantically over her for a while gertrude came back to life.
she never said one word about my news and i did n't dare to refer to it again.
i helped her walk up through the maple grove and up to her room, and then she said, "rob -- is -- living," as if the words were torn out of her, and flung herself on her bed and cried and cried and cried.
i never saw anyone cry so before.
all the tears that she had n't shed all that week came then.
she cried most of last night, i think, but her face this morning looked as if she had seen a vision of some kind, and we were all so happy that we were almost afraid.
""di and nan are home for a couple of weeks.
then they go back to red cross work in the training camp at kingsport.
i envy them.
father says i'm doing just as good work here, with jims and my junior reds.
but it lacks the romance theirs must have.
""kut has fallen.
it was almost a relief when it did fall, we had been dreading it so long.
it crushed us flat for a day and then we picked up and put it behind us.
cousin sophia was as gloomy as usual and came over and groaned that the british were losing everywhere."
"they're good losers," said susan grimly.
"when they lose a thing they keep on looking till they find it again!
anyhow, my king and country need me now to cut potato sets for the back garden, so get you a knife and help me, sophia crawford.
it will divert your thoughts and keep you from worrying over a campaign that you are not called upon to run."
""susan is an old brick, and the way she flattens out poor cousin sophia is beautiful to behold.
""as for verdun, the battle goes on and on, and we see-saw between hope and fear.
but i know that strange dream of miss oliver's foretold the victory of france.
"they shall not pass.""
chapter xx norman douglas speaks out in meeting "where are you wandering, anne o" mine?"
asked the doctor, who even yet, after twenty-four years of marriage, occasionally addressed his wife thus when nobody was about.
anne was sitting on the veranda steps, gazing absently over the wonderful bridal world of spring blossom, beyond the white orchard was a copse of dark young firs and creamy wild cherries, where the robins were whistling madly; for it was evening and the fire of early stars was burning over the maple grove.
anne came back with a little sigh.
""i was just taking relief from intolerable realities in a dream, gilbert -- a dream that all our children were home again -- and all small again -- playing in rainbow valley.
it is always so silent now -- but i was imagining i heard clear voices and gay, childish sounds coming up as i used to.
i could hear jem's whistle and walter's yodel, and the twins" laughter, and for just a few blessed minutes i forgot about the guns on the western front, and had a little false, sweet happiness."
the doctor did not answer.
sometimes his work tricked him into forgetting for a few moments the western front, but not often.
there was a good deal of grey now in his still thick curls that had not been there two years ago.
yet he smiled down into the starry eyes he loved -- the eyes that had once been so full of laughter, and now seemed always full of unshed tears.
susan wandered by with a hoe in her hand and her second best bonnet on her head.
""i have just finished reading a piece in the enterprise which told of a couple being married in an aeroplane.
do you think it would be legal, doctor dear?"
she inquired anxiously.
""i think so," said the doctor gravely.
""well," said susan dubiously, "it seems to me that a wedding is too solemn for anything so giddy as an aeroplane.
but nothing is the same as it used to be.
well, it is half an hour yet before prayer-meeting time, so i am going around to the kitchen garden to have a little evening hate with the weeds.
but all the time i am strafing them i will be thinking about this new worry in the trentino.
i do not like this austrian caper, mrs. dr. dear."
""nor i," said mrs. blythe ruefully.
""all the forenoon i preserved rhubarb with my hands and waited for the war news with my soul.
when it came i shrivelled.
well, i suppose i must go and get ready for the prayer-meeting, too."
every village has its own little unwritten history, handed down from lip to lip through the generations, of tragic, comic, and dramatic events.
they are told at weddings and festivals, and rehearsed around winter firesides.
and in these oral annals of glen st. mary the tale of the union prayer-meeting held that night in the methodist church was destined to fill an imperishable place.
the union prayer-meeting was mr. arnold's idea.
the county battalion, which had been training all winter in charlottetown, was to leave shortly for overseas.
the four winds harbour boys belonging to it from the glen and over-harbour and harbour head and upper glen were all home on their last leave, and mr. arnold thought, properly enough, that it would be a fitting thing to hold a union prayer-meeting for them before they went away.
mr. meredith having agreed, the meeting was announced to be held in the methodist church.
glen prayer-meetings were not apt to be too well attended, but on this particular evening the methodist church was crowded.
everybody who could go was there.
even miss cornelia came -- and it was the first time in her life that miss cornelia had ever set foot inside a methodist church.
it took no less than a world conflict to bring that about.
""i used to hate methodists," said miss cornelia calmly, when her husband expressed surprise over her going, "but i do n't hate them now.
there is no sense in hating methodists when there is a kaiser or a hindenburg in the world."
so miss cornelia went.
norman douglas and his wife went too.
and whiskers-on-the-moon strutted up the aisle to a front pew, as if he fully realized what a distinction he conferred upon the building.
people were somewhat surprised that he should be there, since he usually avoided all assemblages connected in any way with the war.
but mr. meredith had said that he hoped his session would be well represented, and mr. pryor had evidently taken the request to heart.
he wore his best black suit and white tie, his thick, tight, iron-grey curls were neatly arranged, and his broad, red round face looked, as susan most uncharitably thought, more "sanctimonious" than ever.
""the minute i saw that man coming into the church, looking like that, i felt that mischief was brewing, mrs. dr. dear," she said afterwards.
""what form it would take i could not tell, but i knew from face of him that he had come there for no good."
the prayer-meeting opened conventionally and continued quietly.
mr. meredith spoke first with his usual eloquence and feeling.
mr. arnold followed with an address which even miss cornelia had to confess was irreproachable in taste and subject-matter.
and then mr. arnold asked mr. pryor to lead in prayer.
miss cornelia had always averred that mr. arnold had no gumption.
miss cornelia was not apt to err on the side of charity in her judgment of methodist ministers, but in this case she did not greatly overshoot the mark.
the rev. mr. arnold certainly did not have much of that desirable, indefinable quality known as gumption, or he would never have asked whiskers-on-the-moon to lead in prayer at a khaki prayer-meeting.
he thought he was returning the compliment to mr. meredith, who, at the conclusion of his address, had asked a methodist deacon to lead.
some people expected mr. pryor to refuse grumpily -- and that would have made enough scandal.
but mr. pryor bounded briskly to his feet, unctuously said, "let us pray," and forthwith prayed.
in a sonorous voice which penetrated to every corner of the crowded building mr. pryor poured forth a flood of fluent words, and was well on in his prayer before his dazed and horrified audience awakened to the fact that they were listening to a pacifist appeal of the rankest sort.
mr. pryor had at least the courage of his convictions; or perhaps, as people afterwards said, he thought he was safe in a church and that it was an excellent chance to air certain opinions he dared not voice elsewhere, for fear of being mobbed.
he prayed that the unholy war might cease -- that the deluded armies being driven to slaughter on the western front might have their eyes opened to their iniquity and repent while yet there was time -- that the poor young men present in khaki, who had been hounded into a path of murder and militarism, should yet be rescued -- mr. pryor had got this far without let or hindrance; and so paralysed were his hearers, and so deeply imbued with their born-and-bred conviction that no disturbance must ever be made in a church, no matter what the provocation, that it seemed likely that he would continue unchecked to the end.
but one man at least in that audience was not hampered by inherited or acquired reverence for the sacred edifice.
norman douglas was, as susan had often vowed crisply, nothing more or less than a "pagan."
but he was a rampantly patriotic pagan, and when the significance of what mr. pryor was saying fully dawned on him, norman douglas suddenly went berserk.
with a positive roar he bounded to his feet in his side pew, facing the audience, and shouted in tones of thunder: "stop -- stop -- stop that abominable prayer!
what an abominable prayer!"
every head in the church flew up.
a boy in khaki at the back gave a faint cheer.
mr. meredith raised a deprecating hand, but norman was past caring for anything like that.
eluding his wife's restraining grasp, he gave one mad spring over the front of the pew and caught the unfortunate whiskers-on-the-moon by his coat collar.
mr. pryor had not "stopped" when so bidden, but he stopped now, perforce, for norman, his long red beard literally bristling with fury, was shaking him until his bones fairly rattled, and punctuating his shakes with a lurid assortment of abusive epithets.
""you blatant beast!"
-- shake -- "you malignant carrion" -- shake -- "you pig-headed varmint!"
-- shake -- "you putrid pup" -- shake -- "you pestilential parasite" -- shake -- "you -- hunnish scum" -- shake -- "you indecent reptile -- you -- you --" norman choked for a moment.
everybody believed that the next thing he would say, church or no church, would be something that would have to be spelt with asterisks; but at that moment norman encountered his wife's eye and he fell back with a thud on holy writ.
""you whited sepulchre!"
he bellowed, with a final shake, and cast whiskers-on-the-moon from him with a vigour which impelled that unhappy pacifist to the very verge of the choir entrance door.
mr. pryor's once ruddy face was ashen.
but he turned at bay.
""i'll have the law on you for this," he gasped.
""do -- do," roared norman, making another rush.
but mr. pryor was gone.
he had no desire to fall a second time into the hands of an avenging militarist.
norman turned to the platform for one graceless, triumphant moment.
""do n't look so flabbergasted, parsons," he boomed.
""you could n't do it -- nobody would expect it of the cloth -- but somebody had to do it.
you know you're glad i threw him out -- he could n't be let go on yammering and yodelling and yawping sedition and treason.
sedition and treason -- somebody had to deal with it.
i was born for this hour -- i've had my innings in church at last.
i can sit quiet for another sixty years now!
go ahead with your meeting, parsons.
i reckon you wo n't be troubled with any more pacifist prayers."
but the spirit of devotion and reverence had fled.
both ministers realized it and realized that the only thing to do was to close the meeting quietly and let the excited people go.
mr. meredith addressed a few earnest words to the boys in khaki -- which probably saved mr. pryor's windows from a second onslaught -- and mr. arnold pronounced an incongruous benediction, at least he felt it was incongruous, for he could not at once banish from his memory the sight of gigantic norman douglas shaking the fat, pompous little whiskers-on-the-moon as a huge mastiff might shake an overgrown puppy.
and he knew that the same picture was in everybody's mind.
altogether the union prayer-meeting could hardly be called an unqualified success.
but it was remembered in glen st. mary when scores of orthodox and undisturbed assemblies were totally forgotten.
""you will never, no, never, mrs. dr. dear, hear me call norman douglas a pagan again," said susan when she reached home.
""if ellen douglas is not a proud woman this night she should be."
""norman douglas did a wholly indefensible thing," said the doctor.
""pryor should have been let severely alone until the meeting was over.
then later on, his own minister and session should deal with him.
that would have been the proper procedure.
norman's performance was utterly improper and scandalous and outrageous; but, by george," -- the doctor threw back his head and chuckled, "by george, anne-girl, it was satisfying."
chapter xxi "love affairs are horrible" ingleside 20th june 1916 "we have been so busy, and day after day has brought such exciting news, good and bad, that i have n't had time and composure to write in my diary for weeks.
i like to keep it up regularly, for father says a diary of the years of the war should be a very interesting thing to hand down to one's children.
the trouble is, i like to write a few personal things in this blessed old book that might not be exactly what i'd want my children to read.
i feel that i shall be a far greater stickler for propriety in regard to them than i am for myself!
""the first week in june was another dreadful one.
the austrians seemed just on the point of overrunning italy: and then came the first awful news of the battle of jutland, which the germans claimed as a great victory.
susan was the only one who carried on.
"you need never tell me that the kaiser has defeated the british navy," she said, with a contemptuous sniff.
"it is all a german lie and that you may tie to."
and when a couple of days later we found out that she was right and that it had been a british victory instead of a british defeat, we had to put up with a great many" i told you so's," but we endured them very comfortably.
""it took kitchener's death to finish susan.
for the first time i saw her down and out.
we all felt the shock of it but susan plumbed the depths of despair.
the news came at night by "phone but susan would n't believe it until she saw the enterprise headline the next day.
she did not cry or faint or go into hysterics; but she forgot to put salt in the soup, and that is something susan never did in my recollection.
mother and miss oliver and i cried but susan looked at us in stony sarcasm and said, "the kaiser and his six sons are all alive and thriving.
so the world is not left wholly desolate.
why cry, mrs. dr. dear?"
susan continued in this stony, hopeless condition for twenty-four hours, and then cousin sophia appeared and began to condole with her."
"this is terrible news, ai n't it, susan?
we might as well prepare for the worst for it is bound to come.
you said once -- and well do i remember the words, susan baker -- that you had complete confidence in god and kitchener.
ah well, susan baker, there is only god left now."
""whereat cousin sophia put her handkerchief to her eyes pathetically as if the world were indeed in terrible straits.
as for susan, cousin sophia was the salvation of her.
she came to life with a jerk."
"sophia crawford, hold your peace!"
she said sternly.
"you may be an idiot but you need not be an irreverent idiot.
it is no more than decent to be weeping and wailing because the almighty is the sole stay of the allies now.
as for kitchener, his death is a great loss and i do not dispute it.
but the outcome of this war does not depend on one man's life and now that the russians are coming on again you will soon see a change for the better."
""susan said this so energetically that she convinced herself and cheered up immediately.
but cousin sophia shook her head."
"albert's wife wants to call the baby after brusiloff," she said, "but i told her to wait and see what becomes of him first.
them russians has such a habit of petering out."
""the russians are doing splendidly, however, and they have saved italy.
but even when the daily news of their sweeping advance comes we do n't feel like running up the flag as we used to do.
as gertrude says, verdun has slain all exultation.
we would all feel more like rejoicing if the victories were on the western front.
"when will the british strike?"
gertrude sighed this morning.
"we have waited so long -- so long."
""our greatest local event in recent weeks was the route march the county battalion made through the county before it left for overseas.
they marched from charlottetown to lowbridge, then round the harbour head and through the upper glen and so down to the st. mary station.
everybody turned out to see them, except old aunt fannie clow, who is bedridden and mr. pryor, who had n't been seen out even in church since the night of the union prayer meeting the previous week.
""it was wonderful and heartbreaking to see that battalion marching past.
there were young men and middle-aged men in it.
there was laurie mcallister from over-harbour who is only sixteen but swore he was eighteen, so that he could enlist; and there was angus mackenzie, from the upper glen who is fifty-five if he is a day and swore he was forty-four.
there were two south african veterans from lowbridge, and the three eighteen-year-old baxter triplets from harbour head.
everybody cheered as they went by, and they cheered foster booth, who is forty, walking side by side with his son charley who is twenty.
charley's mother died when he was born, and when charley enlisted foster said he'd never yet let charley go anywhere he dare n't go himself, and he did n't mean to begin with the flanders trenches.
at the station dog monday nearly went out of his head.
he tore about and sent messages to jem by them all.
mr. meredith read an address and reta crawford recited "the piper."
the soldiers cheered her like mad and cried "we'll follow -- we'll follow -- we wo n't break faith," and i felt so proud to think that it was my dear brother who had written such a wonderful, heart-stirring thing.
and then i looked at the khaki ranks and wondered if those tall fellows in uniform could be the boys i've laughed with and played with and danced with and teased all my life.
something seems to have touched them and set them apart.
they have heard the piper's call.
""fred arnold was in the battalion and i felt dreadfully about him, for i realized that it was because of me that he was going away with such a sorrowful expression.
i could n't help it but i felt as badly as if i could.
""the last evening of his leave fred came up to ingleside and told me he loved me and asked me if i would promise to marry him some day, if he ever came back.
he was desperately in earnest and i felt more wretched than i ever did in my life.
i could n't promise him that -- why, even if there was no question of ken, i do n't care for fred that way and never could -- but it seemed so cruel and heartless to send him away to the front without any hope of comfort.
i cried like a baby; and yet -- oh, i am afraid that there must be something incurably frivolous about me, because, right in the middle of it all, with me crying and fred looking so wild and tragic, the thought popped into my head that it would be an unendurable thing to see that nose across from me at the breakfast table every morning of my life.
there, that is one of the entries i would n't want my descendants to read in this journal.
but it is the humiliating truth; and perhaps it's just as well that thought did come or i might have been tricked by pity and remorse into giving him some rash assurance.
if fred's nose were as handsome as his eyes and mouth some such thing might have happened.
and then what an unthinkable predicament i should have been in!
""when poor fred became convinced that i could n't promise him, he behaved beautifully -- though that rather made things worse.
if he had been nasty about it i would n't have felt so heartbroken and remorseful -- though why i should feel remorseful i do n't know, for i never encouraged fred to think i cared a bit about him.
yet feel remorseful i did -- and do.
if fred arnold never comes back from overseas, this will haunt me all my life.
""then fred said if he could n't take my love with him to the trenches at least he wanted to feel that he had my friendship, and would i kiss him just once in good-bye before he went -- perhaps for ever?
""i do n't know how i could ever had imagined that love affairs were delightful, interesting things.
they are horrible.
i could n't even give poor heartbroken fred one little kiss, because of my promise to ken.
it seemed so brutal.
i had to tell fred that of course he would have my friendship, but that i could n't kiss him because i had promised somebody else i would n't.
""he said, "it is -- is it -- ken ford?"
""i nodded.
it seemed dreadful to have to tell it -- it was such a sacred little secret just between me and ken.
""when fred went away i came up here to my room and cried so long and so bitterly that mother came up and insisted on knowing what was the matter.
i told her.
she listened to my tale with an expression that clearly said, "can it be possible that anyone has been wanting to marry this baby?"
but she was so nice and understanding and sympathetic, oh, just so race-of-josephy -- that i felt indescribably comforted.
mothers are the dearest things."
"but oh, mother," i sobbed, "he wanted me to kiss him good-bye -- and i could n't -- and that hurt me worse than all the rest.""
"well, why did n't you kiss him?"
asked mother coolly.
"considering the circumstances, i think you might have.""
"but i could n't, mother -- i promised ken when he went away that i would n't kiss anybody else until he came back."
""this was another high explosive for poor mother.
she exclaimed, with the queerest little catch in her voice, "rilla, are you engaged to kenneth ford?""
"i -- do n't -- know," i sobbed."
"you -- do n't -- know?"
repeated mother.
""then i had to tell her the whole story, too; and every time i tell it it seems sillier and sillier to imagine that ken meant anything serious.
i felt idiotic and ashamed by the time i got through.
""mother sat a little while in silence.
then she came over, sat down beside me, and took me in her arms."
"do n't cry, dear little rilla-my-rilla.
you have nothing to reproach yourself with in regard to fred; and if leslie west's son asked you to keep your lips for him, i think you may consider yourself engaged to him.
but -- oh, my baby -- my last little baby -- i have lost you -- the war has made a woman of you too soon."
""i shall never be too much of a woman to find comfort in mother's hugs.
nevertheless, when i saw fred marching by two days later in the parade, my heart ached unbearably.
""but i'm glad mother thinks i'm really engaged to ken!"
chapter xxii little dog monday knows "it is two years tonight since the dance at the light, when jack elliott brought us news of the war.
do you remember, miss oliver?"
cousin sophia answered for miss oliver.
""oh, indeed, rilla, i remember that evening only too well, and you a-prancing down here to show off your party clothes.
did n't i warn you that we could not tell what was before us?
little did you think that night what was before you."
""little did any of us think that," said susan sharply, "not being gifted with the power of prophecy.
it does not require any great foresight, sophia crawford, to tell a body that she will have some trouble before her life is over.
i could do as much myself."
""we all thought the war would be over in a few months then," said rilla wistfully.
""when i look back it seems so ridiculous that we ever could have supposed it."
""and now, two years later, it is no nearer the end than it was then," said miss oliver gloomily.
susan clicked her knitting-needles briskly.
""now, miss oliver, dear, you know that is not a reasonable remark.
you know we are just two years nearer the end, whenever the end is appointed to be."
""albert read in a montreal paper today that a war expert gives it as his opinion that it will last five years more," was cousin sophia's cheerful contribution.
""it ca n't," cried rilla; then she added with a sigh, "two years ago we would have said "it ca n't last two years."
but five more years of this!"
""if rumania comes in, as i have strong hopes now of her doing, you will see the end in five months instead of five years," said susan.
""i've no faith in furriners," sighed cousin sophia.
""the french are foreigners," retorted susan, "and look at verdun.
and think of all the somme victories this blessed summer.
the big push is on and the russians are still going well.
why, general haig says that the german officers he has captured admit that they have lost the war."
""you ca n't believe a word the germans say," protested cousin sophia.
""there is no sense in believing a thing just because you'd like to believe it, susan baker.
the british have lost millions of men at the somme and how far have they got?
look facts in the face, susan baker, look facts in the face."
""they are wearing the germans out and so long as that happens it does not matter whether it is done a few miles east or a few miles west.
i am not," admitted susan in tremendous humility, "i am not a military expert, sophia crawford, but even i can see that, and so could you if you were not determined to take a gloomy view of everything.
the huns have not got all the cleverness in the world.
have you not heard the story of alistair maccallum's son roderick, from the upper glen?
he is a prisoner in germany and his mother got a letter from him last week.
he wrote that he was being very kindly treated and that all the prisoners had plenty of food and so on, till you would have supposed everything was lovely.
but when he signed his name, right in between roderick and maccallum, he wrote two gaelic words that meant "all lies" and the german censor did not understand gaelic and thought it was all part of roddy's name.
so he let it pass, never dreaming how he was diddled.
well, i am going to leave the war to haig for the rest of the day and make a frosting for my chocolate cake.
and when it is made i shall put it on the top shelf.
the last one i made i left it on the lower shelf and little kitchener sneaked in and clawed all the icing off and ate it.
we had company for tea that night and when i went to get my cake what a sight did i behold!"
""has that pore orphan's father never been heerd from yet?"
asked cousin sophia.
""yes, i had a letter from him in july," said rilla.
""he said that when he got word of his wife's death and of my taking the baby -- mr. meredith wrote him, you know -- he wrote right away, but as he never got any answer he had begun to think his letter must have been lost."
""it took him two years to begin to think it," said susan scornfully.
""some people think very slow.
jim anderson has not got a scratch, for all he has been two years in the trenches.
a fool for luck, as the old proverb says."
""he wrote very nicely about jims and said he'd like to see him," said rilla.
""so i wrote and told him all about the wee man, and sent him snapshots.
jims will be two years old next week and he is a perfect duck."
""you did n't used to be very fond of babies," said cousin sophia.
""i'm not a bit fonder of babies in the abstract than ever i was," said rilla, frankly.
""but i do love jims, and i'm afraid i was n't really half as glad as i should have been when jim anderson's letter proved that he was safe and sound."
""you was n't hoping the man would be killed!"
cried cousin sophia in horrified accents.
""no -- no -- no!
i just hoped he would go on forgetting about jims, mrs. crawford."
""and then your pa would have the expense of raising him," said cousin sophia reprovingly.
""you young creeturs are terrible thoughtless."
jims himself ran in at this juncture, so rosy and curly and kissable, that he extorted a qualified compliment even from cousin sophia.
""he's a reel healthy-looking child now, though mebbee his colour is a mite too high -- sorter consumptive looking, as you might say.
i never thought you'd raise him when i saw him the day after you brung him home.
i reely did not think it was in you and i told albert's wife so when i got home.
albert's wife says, says she, "there's more in rilla blythe than you'd think for, aunt sophia."
them was her very words.
"more in rilla blythe than you'd think for."
albert's wife always had a good opinion of you."
cousin sophia sighed, as if to imply that albert's wife stood alone in this against the world.
but cousin sophia really did not mean that.
she was quite fond of rilla in her own melancholy way; but young creeturs had to be kept down.
if they were not kept down society would be demoralized.
""do you remember your walk home from the light two years ago tonight?"
whispered gertrude oliver to rilla, teasingly.
""i should think i do," smiled rilla; and then her smile grew dreamy and absent; she was remembering something else -- that hour with kenneth on the sandshore.
where would ken be tonight?
and jem and jerry and walter and all the other boys who had danced and moonlighted on the old four winds point that evening of mirth and laughter -- their last joyous unclouded evening.
in the filthy trenches of the somme front, with the roar of the guns and the groans of stricken men for the music of ned burr's violin, and the flash of star shells for the silver sparkles on the old blue gulf.
two of them were sleeping under the flanders poppies -- alec burr from the upper glen, and clark manley of lowbridge.
others were wounded in the hospitals.
but so far nothing had touched the manse and the ingleside boys.
they seemed to bear charmed lives.
yet the suspense never grew any easier to bear as the weeks and months of war went by.
""it is n't as if it were some sort of fever to which you might conclude they were immune when they had n't taken it for two years," sighed rilla.
""the danger is just as great and just as real as it was the first day they went into the trenches.
i know this, and it tortures me every day.
and yet i ca n't help hoping that since they've come this far unhurt they'll come through.
oh, miss oliver, what would it be like not to wake up in the morning feeling afraid of the news the day would bring?
i ca n't picture such a state of things somehow.
and two years ago this morning i woke wondering what delightful gift the new day would give me.
these are the two years i thought would be filled with fun."
""would you exchange them -- now -- for two years filled with fun?"
""no," said rilla slowly.
""i would n't.
it's strange -- is n't it?
-- they have been two terrible years -- and yet i have a queer feeling of thankfulness for them -- as if they had brought me something very precious, with all their pain.
i would n't want to go back and be the girl i was two years ago, not even if i could.
not that i think i've made any wonderful progress -- but i'm not quite the selfish, frivolous little doll i was then.
i suppose i had a soul then, miss oliver -- but i did n't know it.
i know it now -- and that is worth a great deal -- worth all the suffering of the past two years.
and still" -- rilla gave a little apologetic laugh, "i do n't want to suffer any more -- not even for the sake of more soul growth.
at the end of two more years i might look back and be thankful for the development they had brought me, too; but i do n't want it now."
""we never do," said miss oliver.
""that is why we are not left to choose our own means and measure of development, i suppose.
no matter how much we value what our lessons have brought us we do n't want to go on with the bitter schooling.
well, let us hope for the best, as susan says; things are really going well now and if rumania lines up, the end may come with a suddenness that will surprise us all."
rumania did come in -- and susan remarked approvingly that its king and queen were the finest looking royal couple she had seen pictures of.
so the summer passed away.
early in september word came that the canadians had been shifted to the somme front and anxiety grew tenser and deeper.
for the first time mrs. blythe's spirit failed her a little, and as the days of suspense wore on the doctor began to look gravely at her, and veto this or that special effort in red cross work.
""oh, let me work -- let me work, gilbert," she entreated feverishly.
""while i'm working i do n't think so much.
if i'm idle i imagine everything -- rest is only torture for me.
my two boys are on the frightful somme front -- and shirley pores day and night over aviation literature and says nothing.
but i see the purpose growing in his eyes.
no, i can not rest -- do n't ask it of me, gilbert."
but the doctor was inexorable.
""i ca n't let you kill yourself, anne-girl," he said.
""when the boys come back i want a mother here to welcome them.
why, you're getting transparent.
it wo n't do -- ask susan there if it will do."
""oh, if susan and you are both banded together against me!"
said anne helplessly.
one day the glorious news came that the canadians had taken courcelette and martenpuich, with many prisoners and guns.
susan ran up the flag and said it was plain to be seen that haig knew what soldiers to pick for a hard job.
the others dared not feel exultant.
who knew what price had been paid?
rilla woke that morning when the dawn was beginning to break and went to her window to look out, her thick creamy eyelids heavy with sleep.
just at dawn the world looks as it never looks at any other time.
the air was cold with dew and the orchard and grove and rainbow valley were full of mystery and wonder.
over the eastern hill were golden deeps and silvery-pink shallows.
there was no wind, and rilla heard distinctly a dog howling in a melancholy way down in the direction of the station.
was it dog monday?
and if it were, why was he howling like that?
rilla shivered; the sound had something boding and grievous in it.
she remembered that miss oliver said once, when they were coming home in the darkness and heard a dog howl, "when a dog cries like that the angel of death is passing."
rilla listened with a curdling fear at her heart.
it was dog monday -- she felt sure of it.
whose dirge was he howling -- to whose spirit was he sending that anguished greeting and farewell?
rilla went back to bed but she could not sleep.
all day she watched and waited in a dread of which she did not speak to anyone.
she went down to see dog monday and the station-master said, "that dog of yours howled from midnight to sunrise something weird.
i dunno what got into him.
i got up once and went out and hollered at him but he paid no "tention to me.
he was sitting all alone in the moonlight out there at the end of the platform, and every few minutes the poor lonely little beggar'd lift his nose and howl as if his heart was breaking.
he never did it afore -- always slept in his kennel real quiet and canny from train to train.
but he sure had something on his mind last night."
dog monday was lying in his kennel.
he wagged his tail and licked rilla's hand.
but he would not touch the food she brought for him.
""i'm afraid he's sick," she said anxiously.
she hated to go away and leave him.
but no bad news came that day -- nor the next -- nor the next.
rilla's fear lifted.
dog monday howled no more and resumed his routine of train meeting and watching.
when five days had passed the ingleside people began to feel that they might be cheerful again.
rilla dashed about the kitchen helping susan with the breakfast and singing so sweetly and clearly that cousin sophia across the road heard her and croaked out to mrs. albert," "sing before eating, cry before sleeping," i've always heard."
but rilla blythe shed no tears before the nightfall.
when her father, his face grey and drawn and old, came to her that afternoon and told her that walter had been killed in action at courcelette she crumpled up in a pitiful little heap of merciful unconsciousness in his arms.
nor did she waken to her pain for many hours.
chapter xxiii "and so, goodnight" the fierce flame of agony had burned itself out and the grey dust of its ashes was over all the world.
rilla's younger life recovered physically sooner than her mother.
for weeks mrs. blythe lay ill from grief and shock.
rilla found it was possible to go on with existence, since existence had still to be reckoned with.
there was work to be done, for susan could not do all.
for her mother's sake she had to put on calmness and endurance as a garment in the day; but night after night she lay in her bed, weeping the bitter rebellious tears of youth until at last tears were all wept out and the little patient ache that was to be in her heart until she died took their place.
she clung to miss oliver, who knew what to say and what not to say.
so few people did.
kind, well-meaning callers and comforters gave rilla some terrible moments.
""you'll get over it in time," mrs. william reese said, cheerfully.
mrs. reese had three stalwart sons, not one of whom had gone to the front.
""it's such a blessing it was walter who was taken and not jem," said miss sarah clow.
""walter was a member of the church, and jem was n't.
i've told mr. meredith many a time that he should have spoken seriously to jem about it before he went away."
""pore, pore walter," sighed mrs. reese.
""do not you come here calling him poor walter," said susan indignantly, appearing in the kitchen door, much to the relief of rilla, who felt that she could endure no more just then.
""he was not poor.
he was richer than any of you.
it is you who stay at home and will not let your sons go who are poor -- poor and naked and mean and small -- pisen poor, and so are your sons, with all their prosperous farms and fat cattle and their souls no bigger than a flea's -- if as big."
""i came here to comfort the afflicted and not to be insulted," said mrs. reese, taking her departure, unregretted by anyone.
then the fire went out of susan and she retreated to her kitchen, laid her faithful old head on the table and wept bitterly for a time.
then she went to work and ironed jims's little rompers.
rilla scolded her gently for it when she herself came in to do it.
""i am not going to have you kill yourself working for any war-baby," susan said obstinately.
""oh, i wish i could just keep on working all the time, susan," cried poor rilla.
""and i wish i did n't have to go to sleep.
it is hideous to go to sleep and forget it for a little while, and wake up and have it all rush over me anew the next morning.
do people ever get used to things like this, susan?
and oh, susan, i ca n't get away from what mrs. reese said.
did walter suffer much -- he was always so sensitive to pain.
oh, susan, if i knew that he did n't i think i could gather up a little courage and strength."
this merciful knowledge was given to rilla.
a letter came from walter's commanding officer, telling them that he had been killed instantly by a bullet during a charge at courcelette.
the same day there was a letter for rilla from walter himself.
rilla carried it unopened to rainbow valley and read it there, in the spot where she had had her last talk with him.
it is a strange thing to read a letter after the writer is dead -- a bitter-sweet thing, in which pain and comfort are strangely mingled.
for the first time since the blow had fallen rilla felt -- a different thing from tremulous hope and faith -- that walter, of the glorious gift and the splendid ideals, still lived, with just the same gift and just the same ideals.
that could not be destroyed -- these could suffer no eclipse.
the personality that had expressed itself in that last letter, written on the eve of courcelette, could not be snuffed out by a german bullet.
it must carry on, though the earthly link with things of earth were broken.
""we're going over the top tomorrow, rilla-my-rilla," wrote walter.
""i wrote mother and di yesterday, but somehow i feel as if i must write you tonight.
i had n't intended to do any writing tonight -- but i've got to.
do you remember old mrs. tom crawford over-harbour, who was always saying that it was "laid on her" to do such and such a thing?
well, that is just how i feel.
it's "laid on me" to write you tonight -- you, sister and chum of mine.
there are some things i want to say before -- well, before tomorrow.
""you and ingleside seem strangely near me tonight.
it's the first time i've felt this since i came.
always home has seemed so far away -- so hopelessly far away from this hideous welter of filth and blood.
but tonight it is quite close to me -- it seems to me i can almost see you -- hear you speak.
and i can see the moonlight shining white and still on the old hills of home.
it has seemed to me ever since i came here that it was impossible that there could be calm gentle nights and unshattered moonlight anywhere in the world.
but tonight somehow, all the beautiful things i have always loved seem to have become possible again -- and this is good, and makes me feel a deep, certain, exquisite happiness.
it must be autumn at home now -- the harbour is a-dream and the old glen hills blue with haze, and rainbow valley a haunt of delight with wild asters blowing all over it -- our old "farewell-summers."
i always liked that name better than "aster" -- it was a poem in itself.
""rilla, you know i've always had premonitions.
you remember the pied piper -- but no, of course you would n't -- you were too young.
one evening long ago when nan and di and jem and the merediths and i were together in rainbow valley i had a queer vision or presentiment -- whatever you like to call it.
rilla, i saw the piper coming down the valley with a shadowy host behind him.
the others thought i was only pretending -- but i saw him for just one moment.
and rilla, last night i saw him again.
i was doing sentry-go and i saw him marching across no-man's - land from our trenches to the german trenches -- the same tall shadowy form, piping weirdly -- and behind him followed boys in khaki.
rilla, i tell you i saw him -- it was no fancy -- no illusion.
i heard his music, and then -- he was gone.
but i had seen him -- and i knew what it meant -- i knew that i was among those who followed him.
""rilla, the piper will pipe me "west" tomorrow.
i feel sure of this.
and rilla, i'm not afraid.
when you hear the news, remember that.
i've won my own freedom here -- freedom from all fear.
i shall never be afraid of anything again -- not of death -- nor of life, if after all, i am to go on living.
and life, i think, would be the harder of the two to face -- for it could never be beautiful for me again.
there would always be such horrible things to remember -- things that would make life ugly and painful always for me.
i could never forget them.
but whether it's life or death, i'm not afraid, rilla-my-rilla, and i am not sorry that i came.
i'm satisfied.
i'll never write the poems i once dreamed of writing -- but i've helped to make canada safe for the poets of the future -- for the workers of the future -- ay, and the dreamers, too -- for if no man dreams, there will be nothing for the workers to fulfil -- the future, not of canada only but of the world -- when the "red rain" of langemarck and verdun shall have brought forth a golden harvest -- not in a year or two, as some foolishly think, but a generation later, when the seed sown now shall have had time to germinate and grow.
yes, i'm glad i came, rilla.
it is n't only the fate of the little sea-born island i love that is in the balance -- nor of canada nor of england.
it's the fate of mankind.
that is what we're fighting for.
and we shall win -- never for a moment doubt that, rilla.
for it is n't only the living who are fighting -- the dead are fighting too.
such an army can not be defeated.
""is there laughter in your face yet, rilla?
i hope so.
the world will need laughter and courage more than ever in the years that will come next.
i do n't want to preach -- this is n't any time for it.
but i just want to say something that may help you over the worst when you hear that i've gone "west."
i've a premonition about you, rilla, as well as about myself.
i think ken will go back to you -- and that there are long years of happiness for you by-and-by.
and you will tell your children of the idea we fought and died for -- teach them it must be lived for as well as died for, else the price paid for it will have been given for nought.
this will be part of your work, rilla.
and if you -- all you girls back in the homeland -- do it, then we who do n't come back will know that you have not "broken faith" with us.
""i meant to write to una tonight, too, but i wo n't have time now.
read this letter to her and tell her it's really meant for you both -- you two dear, fine loyal girls.
tomorrow, when we go over the top -- i'll think of you both -- of your laughter, rilla-my-rilla, and the steadfastness in una's blue eyes -- somehow i see those eyes very plainly tonight, too.
yes, you'll both keep faith -- i'm sure of that -- you and una.
and so -- goodnight.
we go over the top at dawn."
rilla read her letter over many times.
there was a new light on her pale young face when she finally stood up, amid the asters walter had loved, with the sunshine of autumn around her.
for the moment at least, she was lifted above pain and loneliness.
""i will keep faith, walter," she said steadily.
""i will work -- and teach -- and learn -- and laugh, yes, i will even laugh -- through all my years, because of you and because of what you gave when you followed the call."
rilla meant to keep walter's letter as a a sacred treasure.
but, seeing the look on una meredith's face when una had read it and held it back to her, she thought of something.
could she do it?
oh, no, she could not give up walter's letter -- his last letter.
surely it was not selfishness to keep it.
a copy would be such a soulless thing.
but una -- una had so little -- and her eyes were the eyes of a woman stricken to the heart, who yet must not cry out or ask for sympathy.
""una, would you like to have this letter -- to keep?"
she asked slowly.
""yes -- if you can give it to me," una said dully.
""then -- you may have it," said rilla hurriedly.
""thank you," said una.
it was all she said, but there was something in her voice which repaid rilla for her bit of sacrifice.
una took the letter and when rilla had gone she pressed it against her lonely lips.
una knew that love would never come into her life now -- it was buried for ever under the blood-stained soil "somewhere in france."
no one but herself -- and perhaps rilla -- knew it -- would ever know it.
she had no right in the eyes of her world to grieve.
she must hide and bear her long pain as best she could -- alone.
but she, too, would keep faith.
chapter xxiv mary is just in time the autumn of 1916 was a bitter season for ingleside.
mrs. blythe's return to health was slow, and sorrow and loneliness were in all hearts.
every one tried to hide it from the others and "carry on" cheerfully.
rilla laughed a good deal.
nobody at ingleside was deceived by her laughter; it came from her lips only, never from her heart.
but outsiders said some people got over trouble very easily, and irene howard remarked that she was surprised to find how shallow rilla blythe really was.
""why, after all her pose of being so devoted to walter, she does n't seem to mind his death at all.
nobody has ever seen her shed a tear or heard her mention his name.
she has evidently quite forgotten him.
poor fellow -- you'd really think his family would feel it more.
i spoke of him to rilla at the last junior red meeting -- of how fine and brave and splendid he was -- and i said life could never be just the same to me again, now that walter had gone -- we were such friends, you know -- why i was the very first person he told about having enlisted -- and rilla answered, as coolly and indifferently as if she were speaking of an entire stranger, "he was just one of many fine and splendid boys who have given everything for their country."
well, i wish i could take things as calmly -- but i'm not made like that.
i'm so sensitive -- things hurt me terribly -- i really never get over them.
i asked rilla right out why she did n't put on mourning for walter.
she said her mother did n't wish it.
but every one is talking about it."
""rilla does n't wear colours -- nothing but white," protested betty mead.
""white becomes her better than anything else," said irene significantly.
""and we all know black does n't suit her complexion at all.
but of course i'm not saying that is the reason she does n't wear it.
only, it's funny.
if my brother had died i'd have gone into deep mourning.
i would n't have had the heart for anything else.
i confess i'm disappointed in rilla blythe."
""i am not, then," cried betty meade, loyally, "i think rilla is just a wonderful girl.
a few years ago i admit i did think she was rather too vain and gigglesome; but now she is nothing of the sort.
i do n't think there is a girl in the glen who is so unselfish and plucky as rilla, or who has done her bit as thoroughly and patiently.
our junior red cross would have gone on the rocks a dozen times if it had n't been for her tact and perseverance and enthusiasm -- you know that perfectly well, irene."
""why, i am not running rilla down," said irene, opening her eyes widely.
""it was only her lack of feeling i was criticizing.
i suppose she ca n't help it.
of course, she's a born manager -- everyone knows that.
she's very fond of managing, too -- and people like that are very necessary i admit.
so do n't look at me as if i'd said something perfectly dreadful, betty, please.
i'm quite willing to agree that rilla blythe is the embodiment of all the virtues, if that will please you.
and no doubt it is a virtue to be quite unmoved by things that would crush most people."
some of irene's remarks were reported to rilla; but they did not hurt her as they would once have done.
they did n't matter, that was all.
life was too big to leave room for pettiness.
she had a pact to keep and a work to do; and through the long hard days and weeks of that disastrous autumn she was faithful to her task.
the war news was consistently bad, for germany marched from victory to victory over poor rumania.
""foreigners -- foreigners," susan muttered dubiously.
""russians or rumanians or whatever they may be, they are foreigners and you can not tie to them.
but after verdun i shall not give up hope.
and can you tell me, mrs. dr. dear, if the dobruja is a river or a mountain range, or a condition of the atmosphere?"
the presidential election in the united states came off in november, and susan was red-hot over that -- and quite apologetic for her excitement.
""i never thought i would live to see the day when i would be interested in a yankee election, mrs. dr. dear.
it only goes to show we can never know what we will come to in this world, and therefore we should not be proud."
susan stayed up late on the evening of the eleventh, ostensibly to finish a pair of socks.
but she "phoned down to carter flagg's store at intervals, and when the first report came through that hughes had been elected she stalked solemnly upstairs to mrs. blythe's room and announced it in a thrilling whisper from the foot of the bed.
""i thought if you were not asleep you would be interested in knowing it.
i believe it is for the best.
perhaps he will just fall to writing notes, too, mrs. dr. dear, but i hope for better things.
i never was very partial to whiskers, but one can not have everything."
when news came in the morning that after all wilson was re-elected, susan tacked to catch another breeze of optimism.
""well, better a fool you know than a fool you do not know, as the old proverb has it," she remarked cheerfully.
""not that i hold woodrow to be a fool by any means, though by times you would not think he has the sense he was born with.
but he is a good letter writer at least, and we do not know if the hughes man is even that.
all things being considered i commend the yankees.
they have shown good sense and i do not mind admitting it.
cousin sophia wanted them to elect roosevelt, and is much disgruntled because they would not give him a chance.
i had a hankering for him myself, but we must believe that providence over-rules these matters and be satisfied -- though what the almighty means in this affair of rumania i can not fathom -- saying it with all reverence."
susan fathomed it -- or thought she did -- when the asquith ministry went down and lloyd george became premier.
""mrs. dr. dear, lloyd george is at the helm at last.
i have been praying for this for many a day.
now we shall soon see a blessed change.
it took the rumanian disaster to bring it about, no less, and that is the meaning of it, though i could not see it before.
there will be no more shilly-shallying.
i consider that the war is as good as won, and that i shall tie to, whether bucharest falls or not."
bucharest did fall -- and germany proposed peace negotiations.
whereat susan scornfully turned a deaf ear and absolutely refused to listen to such proposals.
when president wilson sent his famous december peace note susan waxed violently sarcastic.
""woodrow wilson is going to make peace, i understand.
first henry ford had a try at it and now comes wilson.
but peace is not made with ink, woodrow, and that you may tie to," said susan, apostrophizing the unlucky president out of the kitchen window nearest the united states.
""lloyd george's speech will tell the kaiser what is what, and you may keep your peace screeds at home and save postage."
""what a pity president wilson ca n't hear you, susan," said rilla slyly.
""indeed, rilla dear, it is a pity that he has no one near him to give him good advice, as it is clear he has not, in all those democrats and republicans," retorted susan.
""i do not know the difference between them, for the politics of the yankees is a puzzle i can not solve, study it as i may.
but as far as seeing through a grindstone goes, i am afraid --" susan shook her head dubiously, "that they are all tarred with the same brush."
""i am thankful christmas is over," rilla wrote in her diary during the last week of a stormy december.
""we had dreaded it so -- the first christmas since courcelette.
but we had all the merediths down for dinner and nobody tried to be gay or cheerful.
we were all just quiet and friendly, and that helped.
then, too, i was so thankful that jims had got better -- so thankful that i almost felt glad -- almost but not quite.
i wonder if i shall ever feel really glad over anything again.
it seems as if gladness were killed in me -- shot down by the same bullet that pierced walter's heart.
perhaps some day a new kind of gladness will be born in my soul -- but the old kind will never live again.
""winter set in awfully early this year.
ten days before christmas we had a big snowstorm -- at least we thought it big at the time.
as it happened, it was only a prelude to the real performance.
it was fine the next day, and ingleside and rainbow valley were wonderful, with the trees all covered with snow, and big drifts everywhere, carved into the most fantastic shapes by the chisel of the northeast wind.
father and mother went up to avonlea.
father thought the change would do mother good, and they wanted to see poor aunt diana, whose son jock had been seriously wounded a short time before.
they left susan and me to keep house, and father expected to be back the next day.
but he never got back for a week.
that night it began to storm again, and it stormed unbrokenly for four days.
it was the worst and longest storm that prince edward island has known for years.
everything was disorganized -- the roads were completely choked up, the trains blockaded, and the telephone wires put entirely out of commission.
""and then jims took ill.
""he had a little cold when father and mother went away, and he kept getting worse for a couple of days, but it did n't occur to me that there was danger of anything serious.
i never even took his temperature, and i ca n't forgive myself, because it was sheer carelessness.
the truth is i had slumped just then.
mother was away, so i let myself go.
all at once i was tired of keeping up and pretending to be brave and cheerful, and i just gave up for a few days and spent most of the time lying on my face on my bed, crying.
i neglected jims -- that is the hateful truth -- i was cowardly and false to what i promised walter -- and if jims had died i could never have forgiven myself.
""then, the third night after father and mother went away, jims suddenly got worse -- oh, so much worse -- all at once.
susan and i were all alone.
gertrude had been at lowbridge when the storm began and had never got back.
at first we were not much alarmed.
jims has had several bouts of croup and susan and morgan and i have always brought him through without much trouble.
but it was n't very long before we were dreadfully alarmed.""
i never saw croup like this before," said susan.
""as for me, i knew, when it was too late, what kind of croup it was.
i knew it was not the ordinary croup -- "false croup" as doctors call it -- but the "true croup" -- and i knew that it was a deadly and dangerous thing.
and father was away and there was no doctor nearer than lowbridge -- and we could not "phone and neither horse nor man could get through the drifts that night.
""gallant little jims put up a good fight for his life, -- susan and i tried every remedy we could think of or find in father's books, but he continued to grow worse.
it was heart-rending to see and hear him.
he gasped so horribly for breath -- the poor little soul -- and his face turned a dreadful bluish colour and had such an agonized expression, and he kept struggling with his little hands, as if he were appealing to us to help him somehow.
i found myself thinking that the boys who had been gassed at the front must have looked like that, and the thought haunted me amid all my dread and misery over jims.
and all the time the fatal membrane in his wee throat grew and thickened and he could n't get it up.
""oh, i was just wild!
i never realized how dear jims was to me until that moment.
and i felt so utterly helpless."
""and then susan gave up.
"we can not save him!
oh, if your father was here -- look at him, the poor little fellow!
i know not what to do."
""i looked at jims and i thought he was dying.
susan was holding him up in his crib to give him a better chance for breath, but it did n't seem as if he could breathe at all.
my little war-baby, with his dear ways and sweet roguish face, was choking to death before my very eyes, and i could n't help him.
i threw down the hot poultice i had ready in despair.
of what use was it?
jims was dying, and it was my fault -- i had n't been careful enough!
""just then -- at eleven o'clock at night -- the door bell rang.
such a ring -- it pealed all over the house above the roar of the storm.
susan could n't go -- she dared not lay jims down -- so i rushed downstairs.
in the hall i paused just a minute -- i was suddenly overcome by an absurd dread.
i thought of a weird story gertrude had told me once.
an aunt of hers was alone in a house one night with her sick husband.
she heard a knock at the door.
and when she went and opened it there was nothing there -- nothing that could be seen, at least.
but when she opened the door a deadly cold wind blew in and seemed to sweep past her right up the stairs, although it was a calm, warm summer night outside.
immediately she heard a cry.
she ran upstairs -- and her husband was dead.
and she always believed, so gertrude said, that when she opened that door she let death in.
""it was so ridiculous of me to feel so frightened.
but i was distracted and worn out, and i simply felt for a moment that i dared not open the door -- that death was waiting outside.
then i remembered that i had no time to waste -- must not be so foolish -- i sprang forward and opened the door.
""certainly a cold wind did blow in and filled the hall with a whirl of snow.
but there on the threshold stood a form of flesh and blood -- mary vance, coated from head to foot with snow -- and she brought life, not death, with her, though i did n't know that then.
i just stared at her.""
i have n't been turned out," grinned mary, as she stepped in and shut the door."
i came up to carter flagg's two days ago and i've been stormed-stayed there ever since.
but old abbie flagg got on my nerves at last, and tonight i just made up my mind to come up here.
i thought i could wade this far, but i can tell you it was as much as a bargain.
once i thought i was stuck for keeps.
ai n't it an awful night?"
""i came to myself and knew i must hurry upstairs.
i explained as quickly as i could to mary, and left her trying to brush the snow off.
upstairs i found that jims was over that paroxysm, but almost as soon as i got back to the room he was in the grip of another.
i could n't do anything but moan and cry -- oh, how ashamed i am when i think of it; and yet what could i do -- we had tried everything we knew -- and then all at once i heard mary vance saying loudly behind me, "why, that child is dying!"
""i whirled around.
did n't i know he was dying -- my little jims!
i could have thrown mary vance out of the door or the window -- anywhere -- at that moment.
there she stood, cool and composed, looking down at my baby, with those, weird white eyes of hers, as she might look at a choking kitten.
i had always disliked mary vance -- and just then i hated her."
"we have tried everything," said poor susan dully.
"it is not ordinary croup.""
"no, it's the dipthery croup," said mary briskly, snatching up an apron.
"and there's mighty little time to lose -- but i know what to do.
when i lived over-harbour with mrs. wiley, years ago, will crawford's kid died of dipthery croup, in spite of two doctors.
and when old aunt christina macallister heard of it -- she was the one brought me round when i nearly died of pneumonia you know -- she was a wonder -- no doctor was a patch on her -- they do n't hatch her breed of cats nowadays, let me tell you -- she said she could have saved him with her grandmother's remedy if she'd been there.
she told mrs. wiley what it was and i've never forgot it.
i've the greatest memory ever -- a thing just lies in the back of my head till the time comes to use it.
got any sulphur in the house, susan?"
""yes, we had sulphur.
susan went down with mary to get it, and i held jims.
i had n't any hope -- not the least.
mary vance might brag as she liked -- she was always bragging -- but i did n't believe any grandmother's remedy could save jims now.
presently mary came back.
she had tied a piece of thick flannel over her mouth and nose, and she carried susan's old tin chip pan, half full of burning coals."
"you watch me," she said boastfully.
"i've never done this, but it's kill or cure that child is dying anyway."
""she sprinkled a spoonful of sulphur over the coals; and then she picked up jims, turned him over, and held him face downward, right over those choking, blinding fumes.
i do n't know why i did n't spring forward and snatch him away.
susan says it was because it was fore-ordained that i should n't, and i think she is right, because it did really seem that i was powerless to move.
susan herself seemed transfixed, watching mary from the doorway.
jims writhed in those big, firm, capable hands of mary -- oh yes, she is capable all right -- and choked and wheezed -- and choked and wheezed -- and i felt that he was being tortured to death -- and then all at once, after what seemed to me an hour, though it really was n't long, he coughed up the membrane that was killing him.
mary turned him over and laid him back on his bed.
he was white as marble and the tears were pouring out of his brown eyes -- but that awful livid look was gone from his face and he could breathe quite easily."
"was n't that some trick?"
said mary gaily."
i had n't any idea how it would work, but i just took a chance.
i'll smoke his throat out again once or twice before morning, just to kill all the germs, but you'll see he'll be all right now."
""jims went right to sleep -- real sleep, not coma, as i feared at first.
mary "smoked him," as she called it, twice through the night, and at daylight his throat was perfectly clear and his temperature was almost normal.
when i made sure of that i turned and looked at mary vance.
she was sitting on the lounge laying down the law to susan on some subject about which susan must have known forty times as much as she did.
but i did n't mind how much law she laid down or how much she bragged.
she had a right to brag -- she had dared to do what i would never have dared, and had saved jims from a horrible death.
it did n't matter any more that she had once chased me through the glen with a codfish; it did n't matter that she had smeared goose-grease all over my dream of romance the night of the lighthouse dance; it did n't matter that she thought she knew more than anybody else and always rubbed it in -- i would never dislike mary vance again.
i went over to her and kissed her."
"what's up now?"
she said."
"nothing -- only i'm so grateful to you, mary.""
"well, i think you ought to be, that's a fact.
you two would have let that baby die on your hands if i had n't happened along," said mary, just beaming with complacency.
she got susan and me a tip-top breakfast and made us eat it, and "bossed the life out of us," as susan says, for two days, until the roads were opened so that she could get home.
jims was almost well by that time, and father turned up.
he heard our tale without saying much.
father is rather scornful generally about what he calls "old wives" remedies."
he laughed a little and said, "after this, mary vance will expect me to call her in for consultation in all my serious cases."
""so christmas was not so hard as i expected it to be; and now the new year is coming -- and we are still hoping for the "big push" that will end the war -- and little dog monday is getting stiff and rheumatic from his cold vigils, but still he "carries on," and shirley continues to read the exploits of the aces.
oh, nineteen-seventeen, what will you bring?"
chapter xxv shirley goes "no, woodrow, there will be no peace without victory," said susan, sticking her knitting needle viciously through president wilson's name in the newspaper column.
""we canadians mean to have peace and victory, too.
you, if it pleases you, woodrow, can have the peace without the victory" -- and susan stalked off to bed with the comfortable consciousness of having got the better of the argument with the president.
but a few days later she rushed to mrs. blythe in red-hot excitement.
""mrs. dr. dear, what do you think?
a "phone message has just come through from charlottetown that woodrow wilson has sent that german ambassador man to the right about at last.
they tell me that means war.
so i begin to think that woodrow's heart is in the right place after all, wherever his head may be, and i am going to commandeer a little sugar and celebrate the occasion with some fudge, despite the howls of the food board.
i thought that submarine business would bring things to a crisis.
i told cousin sophia so when she said it was the beginning of the end for the allies."
""do n't let the doctor hear of the fudge, susan," said anne, with a smile.
""you know he has laid down very strict rules for us along the lines of economy the government has asked for."
""yes, mrs. dr. dear, and a man should be master in his own household, and his women folk should bow to his decrees.
i flatter myself that i am becoming quite efficient in economizing" -- susan had taken to using certain german terms with killing effect -- "but one can exercise a little gumption on the quiet now and then.
shirley was wishing for some of my fudge the other day -- the susan brand, as he called it -- and i said "the first victory there is to celebrate i shall make you some."
i consider this news quite equal to a victory, and what the doctor does not know will never grieve him.
i take the whole responsibility, mrs. dr. dear, so do not you vex your conscience."
susan spoiled shirley shamelessly that winter.
he came home from queen's every week-end, and susan had all his favourite dishes for him, in so far as she could evade or wheedle the doctor, and waited on him hand and foot.
though she talked war constantly to everyone else she never mentioned it to him or before him, but she watched him like a cat watching a mouse; and when the german retreat from the bapaume salient began and continued, susan's exultation was linked up with something deeper than anything she expressed.
surely the end was in sight -- would come now before -- anyone else -- could go.
""things are coming our way at last.
we have got the germans on the run," she boasted.
""the united states has declared war at last, as i always believed they would, in spite of woodrow's gift for letter writing, and you will see they will go into it with a vim since i understand that is their habit, when they do start.
and we have got the germans on the run, too."
""the states mean well," moaned cousin sophia, "but all the vim in the world can not put them on the fighting line this spring, and the allies will be finished before that.
the germans are just luring them on.
that man simonds says their retreat has put the allies in a hole."
""that man simonds has said more than he will ever live to make good," retorted susan.
""i do not worry myself about his opinion as long as lloyd george is premier of england.
he will not be bamboozled and that you may tie to.
things look good to me.
the u. s. is in the war, and we have got kut and bagdad back -- and i would not be surprised to see the allies in berlin by june -- and the russians, too, since they have got rid of the czar.
that, in my opinion was a good piece of work."
""time will show if it is," said cousin sophia, who would have been very indignant if anyone had told her that she would rather see susan put to shame as a seer, than a successful overthrow of tyranny, or even the march of the allies down unter den linden.
but then the woes of the russian people were quite unknown to cousin sophia, while this aggravating, optimistic susan was an ever-present thorn in her side.
just at that moment shirley was sitting on the edge of the table in the living-room, swinging his legs -- a brown, ruddy, wholesome lad, from top to toe, every inch of him -- and saying coolly, "mother and dad, i was eighteen last monday.
do n't you think it's about time i joined up?"
the pale mother looked at him.
""two of my sons have gone and one will never return.
must i give you too, shirley?"
the age-old cry -- "joseph is not and simeon is not; and ye will take benjamin away."
how the mothers of the great war echoed the old patriarch's moan of so many centuries agone!
""you would n't have me a slacker, mother?
i can get into the flying-corps.
what say, dad?"
the doctor's hands were not quite steady as he folded up the powders he was concocting for abbie flagg's rheumatism.
he had known this moment was coming, yet he was not altogether prepared for it.
he answered slowly, "i wo n't try to hold you back from what you believe to be your duty.
but you must not go unless your mother says you may."
shirley said nothing more.
he was not a lad of many words.
anne did not say anything more just then, either.
she was thinking of little joyce's grave in the old burying-ground over-harbour -- little joyce who would have been a woman now, had she lived -- of the white cross in france and the splendid grey eyes of the little boy who had been taught his first lessons of duty and loyalty at her knee -- of jem in the terrible trenches -- of nan and di and rilla, waiting -- waiting -- waiting, while the golden years of youth passed by -- and she wondered if she could bear any more.
she thought not; surely she had given enough.
yet that night she told shirley that he might go.
they did not tell susan right away.
she did not know it until, a few days later, shirley presented himself in her kitchen in his aviation uniform.
susan did n't make half the fuss she had made when jem and walter had gone.
she said stonily, "so they're going to take you, too."
""take me?
no.
i'm going, susan -- got to."
susan sat down by the table, folded her knotted old hands, that had grown warped and twisted working for the ingleside children to still their shaking, and said: "yes, you must go.
i did not see once why such things must be, but i can see now."
""you're a brick, susan," said shirley.
he was relieved that she took it so coolly -- he had been a little afraid, with a boy's horror of "a scene."
he went out whistling gaily; but half an hour later, when pale anne blythe came in, susan was still sitting there.
""mrs. dr. dear," said susan, making an admission she would once have died rather than make, "i feel very old.
jem and walter were yours but shirley is mine.
and i can not bear to think of him flying -- his machine crashing down -- the life crushed out of his body -- the dear little body i nursed and cuddled when he was a wee baby."
""susan -- do n't," cried anne.
""oh, mrs. dr. dear, i beg your pardon.
i ought not to have said anything like that out loud.
i sometimes forget that i resolved to be a heroine.
this -- this has shaken me a little.
but i will not forget myself again.
only if things do not go as smoothly in the kitchen for a few days i hope you will make due allowance for me.
at least," said poor susan, forcing a grim smile in a desperate effort to recover lost standing, "at least flying is a clean job.
he will not get so dirty and messed up as he would in the trenches, and that is well, for he has always been a tidy child."
so shirley went -- not radiantly, as to a high adventure, like jem, not in a white flame of sacrifice, like walter, but in a cool, business-like mood, as of one doing something, rather dirty and disagreeable, that had just got to be done.
he kissed susan for the first time since he was five years old, and said, "good-bye, susan -- mother susan."
""my little brown boy -- my little brown boy," said susan.
""i wonder," she thought bitterly, as she looked at the doctor's sorrowful face, "if you remember how you spanked him once when he was a baby.
i am thankful i have nothing like that on my conscience now."
the doctor did not remember the old discipline.
but before he put on his hat to go out on his round of calls he stood for a moment in the great silent living-room that had once been full of children's laughter.
""our last son -- our last son," he said aloud.
""a good, sturdy, sensible lad, too.
always reminded me of my father.
i suppose i ought to be proud that he wanted to go -- i was proud when jem went -- even when walter went -- but "our house is left us desolate.""
""i have been thinking, doctor," old sandy of the upper glen said to him that afternoon, "that your house will be seeming very big the day."
highland sandy's quaint phrase struck the doctor as perfectly expressive.
ingleside did seem very big and empty that night.
yet shirley had been away all winter except for week-ends, and had always been a quiet fellow even when home.
was it because he had been the only one left that his going seemed to leave such a huge blank -- that every room seemed vacant and deserted -- that the very trees on the lawn seemed to be trying to comfort each other with caresses of freshly-budding boughs for the loss of the last of the little lads who had romped under them in childhood?
susan worked very hard all day and late into the night.
when she had wound the kitchen clock and put dr. jekyll out, none too gently, she stood for a little while on the doorstep, looking down the glen, which lay tranced in faint, silvery light from a sinking young moon.
but susan did not see the familiar hills and harbour.
she was looking at the aviation camp in kingsport where shirley was that night.
""he called me "mother susan,"" she was thinking.
""well, all our men folk have gone now -- jem and walter and shirley and jerry and carl.
and none of them had to be driven to it.
so we have a right to be proud.
but pride --" susan sighed bitterly -- "pride is cold company and that there is no gainsaying."
the moon sank lower into a black cloud in the west, the glen went out in an eclipse of sudden shadow -- and thousands of miles away the canadian boys in khaki -- the living and the dead -- were in possession of vimy ridge.
vimy ridge is a name written in crimson and gold on the canadian annals of the great war.
""the british could n't take it and the french could n't take it," said a german prisoner to his captors, "but you canadians are such fools that you do n't know when a place ca n't be taken!"
so the "fools" took it -- and paid the price.
jerry meredith was seriously wounded at vimy ridge -- shot in the back, the telegram said.
""poor nan," said mrs. blythe, when the news came.
she thought of her own happy girlhood at old green gables.
there had been no tragedy like this in it.
how the girls of to-day had to suffer!
when nan came home from redmond two weeks later her face showed what those weeks had meant to her.
john meredith, too, seemed to have grown old suddenly in them.
faith did not come home; she was on her way across the atlantic as a v.a.d. di had tried to wring from her father consent to her going also, but had been told that for her mother's sake it could not be given.
so di, after a flying visit home, went back to her red cross work in kingsport.
the mayflowers bloomed in the secret nooks of rainbow valley.
rilla was watching for them.
jem had once taken his mother the earliest mayflowers; walter brought them to her when jem was gone; last spring shirley had sought them out for her; now, rilla thought she must take the boys" place in this.
but before she had discovered any, bruce meredith came to ingleside one twilight with his hands full of delicate pink sprays.
he stalked up the steps of the veranda and laid them on mrs. blythe's lap.
""because shirley is n't here to bring them," he said in his funny, shy, blunt way.
""and you thought of this, you darling," said anne, her lips quivering, as she looked at the stocky, black-browed little chap, standing before her, with his hands thrust into his pockets.
""i wrote jem to-day and told him not to worry "bout you not getting your mayflowers," said bruce seriously,"'cause i'd see to that.
and i told him i would be ten pretty soon now, so it wo n't be very long before i'll be eighteen, and then i'll go to help him fight, and maybe let him come home for a rest while i took his place.
i wrote jerry, too.
jerry's getting better, you know."
""is he?
have you had any good news about him?"
""yes.
mother had a letter to-day, and it said he was out of danger."
""oh, thank god," murmured mrs. blythe, in a half-whisper.
bruce looked at her curiously.
""that is what father said when mother told him.
but when l said it the other day when i found out mr. mead's dog had n't hurt my kitten -- i thought he had shooken it to death, you know -- father looked awful solemn and said i must never say that again about a kitten.
but i could n't understand why, mrs. blythe.
i felt awful thankful, and it must have been god that saved stripey, because that mead dog had "normous jaws, and oh, how it shook poor stripey.
and so why could n't i thank him?
"course," added bruce reminiscently, "maybe i said it too loud --'cause i was awful glad and excited when i found stripey was all right.
i "most shouted it, mrs. blythe.
maybe if i'd said it sort of whispery like you and father it would have been all right.
do you know, mrs. blythe" -- bruce dropped to a "whispery" tone, edging a little nearer to anne -- "what i would like to do to the kaiser if i could?"
""what would you like to do, laddie?"
""norman reese said in school to-day that he would like to tie the kaiser to a tree and set cross dogs to worrying him," said bruce gravely.
""and emily flagg said she would like to put him in a cage and poke sharp things into him.
and they all said things like that.
but mrs. blythe" -- bruce took a little square paw out of his pocket and put it earnestly on anne's knee -- "i would like to turn the kaiser into a good man -- a very good man -- all at once if i could.
that is what i would do.
do n't you think, mrs. blythe, that would be the very worstest punishment of all?"
""bless the child," said susan, "how do you make out that would be any kind of a punishment for that wicked fiend?"
""do n't you see," said bruce, looking levelly at susan, out of his blackly blue eyes, "if he was turned into a good man he would understand how dreadful the things he has done are, and he would feel so terrible about it that he would be more unhappy and miserable than he could ever be in any other way.
he would feel just awful -- and he would go on feeling like that forever.
yes" -- bruce clenched his hands and nodded his head emphatically, "yes, i would make the kaiser a good man -- that is what i would do -- it would serve him "zackly right."
chapter xxvi susan has a proposal of marriage an aeroplane was flying over glen st. mary, like a great bird poised against the western sky -- a sky so clear and of such a pale, silvery yellow, that it gave an impression of a vast, wind-freshened space of freedom.
the little group on the ingleside lawn looked up at it with fascinated eyes, although it was by no means an unusual thing to see an occasional hovering plane that summer.
susan was always intensely excited.
who knew but that it might be shirley away up there in the clouds, flying over to the island from kingsport?
but shirley had gone overseas now, so susan was not so keenly interested in this particular aeroplane and its pilot.
nevertheless, she looked at it with awe.
""i wonder, mrs. dr. dear," she said solemnly, "what the old folks down there in the graveyard would think if they could rise out of their graves for one moment and behold that sight.
i am sure my father would disapprove of it, for he was a man who did not believe in new-fangled ideas of any sort.
he always cut his grain with a reaping hook to the day of his death.
a mower he would not have.
what was good enough for his father was good enough for him, he used to say.
i hope it is not unfilial to say that i think he was wrong in that point of view, but i am not sure i go so far as to approve of aeroplanes, though they may be a military necessity.
if the almighty had meant us to fly he would have provided us with wings.
since he did not it is plain he meant us to stick to the solid earth.
at any rate, you will never see me, mrs. dr. dear, cavorting through the sky in an aeroplane."
""but you wo n't refuse to cavort a bit in father's new automobile when it comes, will you, susan?"
teased rilla.
""i do not expect to trust my old bones in automobiles, either," retorted susan.
""but i do not look upon them as some narrow-minded people do.
whiskers-on-the-moon says the government should be turned out of office for permitting them to run on the island at all.
he foams at the mouth, they tell me, when he sees one.
the other day he saw one coming along that narrow side-road by his wheatfield, and whiskers bounded over the fence and stood right in the middle of the road, with his pitchfork.
the man in the machine was an agent of some kind, and whiskers hates agents as much as he hates automobiles.
he made the car come to a halt, because there was not room to pass him on either side, and the agent could not actually run over him.
then he raised his pitchfork and shouted, "get out of this with your devil-machine or i will run this pitchfork clean through you."
and mrs. dr. dear, if you will believe me, that poor agent had to back his car clean out to the lowbridge road, nearly a mile, whiskers following him every step, shaking his pitchfork and bellowing insults.
i'll mind that when we come to clear accounts."
and i believe he not only meant what he said, but would have done it; so high a place did the covenant hold in his affections.
but this is matter only for conjecture, things having gone otherwise than he forecast.
""keep her away a point," sings out mr. riach.
""reef to windward!"
and just at the same time the tide caught the brig, and threw the wind out of her sails.
she came round into the wind like a top, and the next moment struck the reef with such a dunch as threw us all flat upon the deck, and came near to shake mr. riach from his place upon the mast.
i was on my feet in a minute.
the reef on which we had struck was close in under the southwest end of mull, off a little isle they call earraid, which lay low and black upon the larboard.
sometimes the swell broke clean over us; sometimes it only ground the poor brig upon the reef, so that we could hear her beat herself to pieces; and what with the great noise of the sails, and the singing of the wind, and the flying of the spray in the moonlight, and the sense of danger, i think my head must have been partly turned, for i could scarcely understand the things i saw.
presently i observed mr. riach and the seamen busy round the skiff, and, still in the same blank, ran over to assist them; and as soon as i set my hand to work, my mind came clear again.
it was no very easy task, for the skiff lay amidships and was full of hamper, and the breaking of the heavier seas continually forced us to give over and hold on; but we all wrought like horses while we could.
meanwhile such of the wounded as could move came clambering out of the fore-scuttle and began to help; while the rest that lay helpless in their bunks harrowed me with screaming and begging to be saved.
the captain took no part.
it seemed he was struck stupid.
he stood holding by the shrouds, talking to himself and groaning out aloud whenever the ship hammered on the rock.
his brig was like wife and child to him; he had looked on, day by day, at the mishandling of poor ransome; but when it came to the brig, he seemed to suffer along with her.
all the time of our working at the boat, i remember only one other thing: that i asked alan, looking across at the shore, what country it was; and he answered, it was the worst possible for him, for it was a land of the campbells.
we had one of the wounded men told off to keep a watch upon the seas and cry us warning.
well, we had the boat about ready to be launched, when this man sang out pretty shrill: "for god's sake, hold on!"
we knew by his tone that it was something more than ordinary; and sure enough, there followed a sea so huge that it lifted the brig right up and canted her over on her beam.
whether the cry came too late, or my hold was too weak, i know not; but at the sudden tilting of the ship i was cast clean over the bulwarks into the sea.
i went down, and drank my fill, and then came up, and got a blink of the moon, and then down again.
they say a man sinks a third time for good.
i can not be made like other folk, then; for i would not like to write how often i went down, or how often i came up again.
all the while, i was being hurled along, and beaten upon and choked, and then swallowed whole; and the thing was so distracting to my wits, that i was neither sorry nor afraid.
presently, i found i was holding to a spar, which helped me somewhat.
and then all of a sudden i was in quiet water, and began to come to myself.
it was the spare yard i had got hold of, and i was amazed to see how far i had travelled from the brig. i hailed her, indeed; but it was plain she was already out of cry.
she was still holding together; but whether or not they had yet launched the boat, i was too far off and too low down to see.
while i was hailing the brig, i spied a tract of water lying between us where no great waves came, but which yet boiled white all over and bristled in the moon with rings and bubbles.
sometimes the whole tract swung to one side, like the tail of a live serpent; sometimes, for a glimpse, it would all disappear and then boil up again.
what it was i had no guess, which for the time increased my fear of it; but i now know it must have been the roost or tide race, which had carried me away so fast and tumbled me about so cruelly, and at last, as if tired of that play, had flung out me and the spare yard upon its landward margin.
i now lay quite becalmed, and began to feel that a man can die of cold as well as of drowning.
the shores of earraid were close in; i could see in the moonlight the dots of heather and the sparkling of the mica in the rocks.
""well," thought i to myself, "if i can not get as far as that, it's strange!"
i had no skill of swimming, essen water being small in our neighbourhood; but when i laid hold upon the yard with both arms, and kicked out with both feet, i soon begun to find that i was moving.
hard work it was, and mortally slow; but in about an hour of kicking and splashing, i had got well in between the points of a sandy bay surrounded by low hills.
the sea was here quite quiet; there was no sound of any surf; the moon shone clear; and i thought in my heart i had never seen a place so desert and desolate.
but it was dry land; and when at last it grew so shallow that i could leave the yard and wade ashore upon my feet, i can not tell if i was more tired or more grateful.
both, at least, i was: tired as i never was before that night; and grateful to god as i trust i have been often, though never with more cause.
chapter xiv the islet with my stepping ashore i began the most unhappy part of my adventures.
it was half-past twelve in the morning, and though the wind was broken by the land, it was a cold night.
i dared not sit down -lrb- for i thought i should have frozen -rrb-, but took off my shoes and walked to and fro upon the sand, bare-foot, and beating my breast with infinite weariness.
there was no sound of man or cattle; not a cock crew, though it was about the hour of their first waking; only the surf broke outside in the distance, which put me in mind of my perils and those of my friend.
to walk by the sea at that hour of the morning, and in a place so desert-like and lonesome, struck me with a kind of fear.
as soon as the day began to break i put on my shoes and climbed a hill -- the ruggedest scramble i ever undertook -- falling, the whole way, between big blocks of granite, or leaping from one to another.
when i got to the top the dawn was come.
there was no sign of the brig, which must have lifted from the reef and sunk.
the boat, too, was nowhere to be seen.
there was never a sail upon the ocean; and in what i could see of the land was neither house nor man.
i was afraid to think what had befallen my shipmates, and afraid to look longer at so empty a scene.
what with my wet clothes and weariness, and my belly that now began to ache with hunger, i had enough to trouble me without that.
so i set off eastward along the south coast, hoping to find a house where i might warm myself, and perhaps get news of those i had lost.
and at the worst, i considered the sun would soon rise and dry my clothes.
after a little, my way was stopped by a creek or inlet of the sea, which seemed to run pretty deep into the land; and as i had no means to get across, i must needs change my direction to go about the end of it.
it was still the roughest kind of walking; indeed the whole, not only of earraid, but of the neighbouring part of mull -lrb- which they call the ross -rrb- is nothing but a jumble of granite rocks with heather in among.
at first the creek kept narrowing as i had looked to see; but presently to my surprise it began to widen out again.
at this i scratched my head, but had still no notion of the truth: until at last i came to a rising ground, and it burst upon me all in a moment that i was cast upon a little barren isle, and cut off on every side by the salt seas.
instead of the sun rising to dry me, it came on to rain, with a thick mist; so that my case was lamentable.
i stood in the rain, and shivered, and wondered what to do, till it occurred to me that perhaps the creek was fordable.
back i went to the narrowest point and waded in.
but not three yards from shore, i plumped in head over ears; and if ever i was heard of more, it was rather by god's grace than my own prudence.
i was no wetter -lrb- for that could hardly be -rrb-, but i was all the colder for this mishap; and having lost another hope was the more unhappy.
and now, all at once, the yard came in my head.
what had carried me through the roost would surely serve me to cross this little quiet creek in safety.
with that i set off, undaunted, across the top of the isle, to fetch and carry it back.
it was a weary tramp in all ways, and if hope had not buoyed me up, i must have cast myself down and given up.
whether with the sea salt, or because i was growing fevered, i was distressed with thirst, and had to stop, as i went, and drink the peaty water out of the hags.
i came to the bay at last, more dead than alive; and at the first glance, i thought the yard was something farther out than when i left it.
in i went, for the third time, into the sea.
the sand was smooth and firm, and shelved gradually down, so that i could wade out till the water was almost to my neck and the little waves splashed into my face.
but at that depth my feet began to leave me, and i durst venture in no farther.
as for the yard, i saw it bobbing very quietly some twenty feet beyond.
i had borne up well until this last disappointment; but at that i came ashore, and flung myself down upon the sands and wept.
the time i spent upon the island is still so horrible a thought to me, that i must pass it lightly over.
in all the books i have read of people cast away, they had either their pockets full of tools, or a chest of things would be thrown upon the beach along with them, as if on purpose.
my case was very different.
i had nothing in my pockets but money and alan's silver button; and being inland bred, i was as much short of knowledge as of means.
i knew indeed that shell-fish were counted good to eat; and among the rocks of the isle i found a great plenty of limpets, which at first i could scarcely strike from their places, not knowing quickness to be needful.
there were, besides, some of the little shells that we call buckies; i think periwinkle is the english name.
of these two i made my whole diet, devouring them cold and raw as i found them; and so hungry was i, that at first they seemed to me delicious.
perhaps they were out of season, or perhaps there was something wrong in the sea about my island.
but at least i had no sooner eaten my first meal than i was seized with giddiness and retching, and lay for a long time no better than dead.
a second trial of the same food -lrb- indeed i had no other -rrb- did better with me, and revived my strength.
but as long as i was on the island, i never knew what to expect when i had eaten; sometimes all was well, and sometimes i was thrown into a miserable sickness; nor could i ever distinguish what particular fish it was that hurt me.
all day it streamed rain; the island ran like a sop, there was no dry spot to be found; and when i lay down that night, between two boulders that made a kind of roof, my feet were in a bog.
the second day i crossed the island to all sides.
there was no one part of it better than another; it was all desolate and rocky; nothing living on it but game birds which i lacked the means to kill, and the gulls which haunted the outlying rocks in a prodigious number.
but the creek, or strait, that cut off the isle from the main-land of the ross, opened out on the north into a bay, and the bay again opened into the sound of iona; and it was the neighbourhood of this place that i chose to be my home; though if i had thought upon the very name of home in such a spot, i must have burst out weeping.
i had good reasons for my choice.
there was in this part of the isle a little hut of a house like a pig's hut, where fishers used to sleep when they came there upon their business; but the turf roof of it had fallen entirely in; so that the hut was of no use to me, and gave me less shelter than my rocks.
what was more important, the shell-fish on which i lived grew there in great plenty; when the tide was out i could gather a peck at a time: and this was doubtless a convenience.
but the other reason went deeper.
i had become in no way used to the horrid solitude of the isle, but still looked round me on all sides -lrb- like a man that was hunted -rrb-, between fear and hope that i might see some human creature coming.
now, from a little up the hillside over the bay, i could catch a sight of the great, ancient church and the roofs of the people's houses in iona.
and on the other hand, over the low country of the ross, i saw smoke go up, morning and evening, as if from a homestead in a hollow of the land.
i used to watch this smoke, when i was wet and cold, and had my head half turned with loneliness; and think of the fireside and the company, till my heart burned.
it was the same with the roofs of iona.
altogether, this sight i had of men's homes and comfortable lives, although it put a point on my own sufferings, yet it kept hope alive, and helped me to eat my raw shell-fish -lrb- which had soon grown to be a disgust -rrb-, and saved me from the sense of horror i had whenever i was quite alone with dead rocks, and fowls, and the rain, and the cold sea.
i say it kept hope alive; and indeed it seemed impossible that i should be left to die on the shores of my own country, and within view of a church-tower and the smoke of men's houses.
but the second day passed; and though as long as the light lasted i kept a bright look-out for boats on the sound or men passing on the ross, no help came near me.
it still rained, and i turned in to sleep, as wet as ever, and with a cruel sore throat, but a little comforted, perhaps, by having said good-night to my next neighbours, the people of iona.
charles the second declared a man could stay outdoors more days in the year in the climate of england than in any other.
this was very like a king, with a palace at his back and changes of dry clothes.
but he must have had better luck on his flight from worcester than i had on that miserable isle.
it was the height of the summer; yet it rained for more than twenty-four hours, and did not clear until the afternoon of the third day.
this was the day of incidents.
in the morning i saw a red deer, a buck with a fine spread of antlers, standing in the rain on the top of the island; but he had scarce seen me rise from under my rock, before he trotted off upon the other side.
i supposed he must have swum the strait; though what should bring any creature to earraid, was more than i could fancy.
a little after, as i was jumping about after my limpets, i was startled by a guinea-piece, which fell upon a rock in front of me and glanced off into the sea.
when the sailors gave me my money again, they kept back not only about a third of the whole sum, but my father's leather purse; so that from that day out, i carried my gold loose in a pocket with a button.
i now saw there must be a hole, and clapped my hand to the place in a great hurry.
but this was to lock the stable door after the steed was stolen.
i had left the shore at queensferry with near on fifty pounds; now i found no more than two guinea-pieces and a silver shilling.
it is true i picked up a third guinea a little after, where it lay shining on a piece of turf.
that made a fortune of three pounds and four shillings, english money, for a lad, the rightful heir of an estate, and now starving on an isle at the extreme end of the wild highlands.
this state of my affairs dashed me still further; and, indeed my plight on that third morning was truly pitiful.
my clothes were beginning to rot; my stockings in particular were quite worn through, so that my shanks went naked; my hands had grown quite soft with the continual soaking; my throat was very sore, my strength had much abated, and my heart so turned against the horrid stuff i was condemned to eat, that the very sight of it came near to sicken me.
and yet the worst was not yet come.
there is a pretty high rock on the northwest of earraid, which -lrb- because it had a flat top and overlooked the sound -rrb- i was much in the habit of frequenting; not that ever i stayed in one place, save when asleep, my misery giving me no rest.
indeed, i wore myself down with continual and aimless goings and comings in the rain.
as soon, however, as the sun came out, i lay down on the top of that rock to dry myself.
the comfort of the sunshine is a thing i can not tell.
it set me thinking hopefully of my deliverance, of which i had begun to despair; and i scanned the sea and the ross with a fresh interest.
on the south of my rock, a part of the island jutted out and hid the open ocean, so that a boat could thus come quite near me upon that side, and i be none the wiser.
well, all of a sudden, a coble with a brown sail and a pair of fishers aboard of it, came flying round that corner of the isle, bound for iona.
i shouted out, and then fell on my knees on the rock and reached up my hands and prayed to them.
they were near enough to hear -- i could even see the colour of their hair; and there was no doubt but they observed me, for they cried out in the gaelic tongue, and laughed.
but the boat never turned aside, and flew on, right before my eyes, for iona.
i could not believe such wickedness, and ran along the shore from rock to rock, crying on them piteously even after they were out of reach of my voice, i still cried and waved to them; and when they were quite gone, i thought my heart would have burst.
all the time of my troubles i wept only twice.
once, when i could not reach the yard, and now, the second time, when these fishers turned a deaf ear to my cries.
but this time i wept and roared like a wicked child, tearing up the turf with my nails, and grinding my face in the earth.
if a wish would kill men, those two fishers would never have seen morning, and i should likely have died upon my island.
when i was a little over my anger, i must eat again, but with such loathing of the mess as i could now scarce control.
sure enough, i should have done as well to fast, for my fishes poisoned me again.
i had all my first pains; my throat was so sore i could scarce swallow; i had a fit of strong shuddering, which clucked my teeth together; and there came on me that dreadful sense of illness, which we have no name for either in scotch or english.
i thought i should have died, and made my peace with god, forgiving all men, even my uncle and the fishers; and as soon as i had thus made up my mind to the worst, clearness came upon me; i observed the night was falling dry; my clothes were dried a good deal; truly, i was in a better case than ever before, since i had landed on the isle; and so i got to sleep at last, with a thought of gratitude.
the next day -lrb- which was the fourth of this horrible life of mine -rrb- i found my bodily strength run very low.
but the sun shone, the air was sweet, and what i managed to eat of the shell-fish agreed well with me and revived my courage.
i was scarce back on my rock -lrb- where i went always the first thing after i had eaten -rrb- before i observed a boat coming down the sound, and with her head, as i thought, in my direction.
i began at once to hope and fear exceedingly; for i thought these men might have thought better of their cruelty and be coming back to my assistance.
but another disappointment, such as yesterday's, was more than i could bear.
i turned my back, accordingly, upon the sea, and did not look again till i had counted many hundreds.
the boat was still heading for the island.
the next time i counted the full thousand, as slowly as i could, my heart beating so as to hurt me.
and then it was out of all question.
she was coming straight to earraid!
i could no longer hold myself back, but ran to the seaside and out, from one rock to another, as far as i could go.
it is a marvel i was not drowned; for when i was brought to a stand at last, my legs shook under me, and my mouth was so dry, i must wet it with the sea-water before i was able to shout.
all this time the boat was coming on; and now i was able to perceive it was the same boat and the same two men as yesterday.
this i knew by their hair, which the one had of a bright yellow and the other black.
but now there was a third man along with them, who looked to be of a better class.
as soon as they were come within easy speech, they let down their sail and lay quiet.
in spite of my supplications, they drew no nearer in, and what frightened me most of all, the new man tee-hee'd with laughter as he talked and looked at me.
then he stood up in the boat and addressed me a long while, speaking fast and with many wavings of his hand.
i told him i had no gaelic; and at this he became very angry, and i began to suspect he thought he was talking english.
listening very close, i caught the word "whateffer" several times; but all the rest was gaelic and might have been greek and hebrew for me.
""whatever," said i, to show him i had caught a word.
""yes, yes -- yes, yes," says he, and then he looked at the other men, as much as to say, "i told you i spoke english," and began again as hard as ever in the gaelic.
this time i picked out another word, "tide."
then i had a flash of hope.
i remembered he was always waving his hand towards the mainland of the ross.
""do you mean when the tide is out --?"
i cried, and could not finish.
""yes, yes," said he.
""tide."
at that i turned tail upon their boat -lrb- where my adviser had once more begun to tee-hee with laughter -rrb-, leaped back the way i had come, from one stone to another, and set off running across the isle as i had never run before.
in about half an hour i came out upon the shores of the creek; and, sure enough, it was shrunk into a little trickle of water, through which i dashed, not above my knees, and landed with a shout on the main island.
a sea-bred boy would not have stayed a day on earraid; which is only what they call a tidal islet, and except in the bottom of the neaps, can be entered and left twice in every twenty-four hours, either dry-shod, or at the most by wading.
even i, who had the tide going out and in before me in the bay, and even watched for the ebbs, the better to get my shellfish -- even i -lrb- i say -rrb- if i had sat down to think, instead of raging at my fate, must have soon guessed the secret, and got free.
it was no wonder the fishers had not understood me.
the wonder was rather that they had ever guessed my pitiful illusion, and taken the trouble to come back.
i had starved with cold and hunger on that island for close upon one hundred hours.
but for the fishers, i might have left my bones there, in pure folly.
and even as it was, i had paid for it pretty dear, not only in past sufferings, but in my present case; being clothed like a beggar-man, scarce able to walk, and in great pain of my sore throat.
i have seen wicked men and fools, a great many of both; and i believe they both get paid in the end; but the fools first.
chapter xv the lad with the silver button: through the isle of mull the ross of mull, which i had now got upon, was rugged and trackless, like the isle i had just left; being all bog, and brier, and big stone.
there may be roads for them that know that country well; but for my part i had no better guide than my own nose, and no other landmark than ben more.
i aimed as well as i could for the smoke i had seen so often from the island; and with all my great weariness and the difficulty of the way came upon the house in the bottom of a little hollow about five or six at night.
it was low and longish, roofed with turf and built of unmortared stones; and on a mound in front of it, an old gentleman sat smoking his pipe in the sun.
with what little english he had, he gave me to understand that my shipmates had got safe ashore, and had broken bread in that very house on the day after.
""was there one," i asked, "dressed like a gentleman?"
he said they all wore rough great-coats; but to be sure, the first of them, the one that came alone, wore breeches and stockings, while the rest had sailors" trousers.
""ah," said i, "and he would have a feathered hat?"
he told me, no, that he was bareheaded like myself.
at first i thought alan might have lost his hat; and then the rain came in my mind, and i judged it more likely he had it out of harm's way under his great-coat.
this set me smiling, partly because my friend was safe, partly to think of his vanity in dress.
and then the old gentleman clapped his hand to his brow, and cried out that i must be the lad with the silver button.
""why, yes!"
said i, in some wonder.
""well, then," said the old gentleman, "i have a word for you, that you are to follow your friend to his country, by torosay."
he then asked me how i had fared, and i told him my tale.
a south-country man would certainly have laughed; but this old gentleman -lrb- i call him so because of his manners, for his clothes were dropping off his back -rrb- heard me all through with nothing but gravity and pity.
when i had done, he took me by the hand, led me into his hut -lrb- it was no better -rrb- and presented me before his wife, as if she had been the queen and i a duke.
the good woman set oat-bread before me and a cold grouse, patting my shoulder and smiling to me all the time, for she had no english; and the old gentleman -lrb- not to be behind -rrb- brewed me a strong punch out of their country spirit.
all the while i was eating, and after that when i was drinking the punch, i could scarce come to believe in my good fortune; and the house, though it was thick with the peat-smoke and as full of holes as a colander, seemed like a palace.
the punch threw me in a strong sweat and a deep slumber; the good people let me lie; and it was near noon of the next day before i took the road, my throat already easier and my spirits quite restored by good fare and good news.
the old gentleman, although i pressed him hard, would take no money, and gave me an old bonnet for my head; though i am free to own i was no sooner out of view of the house than i very jealously washed this gift of his in a wayside fountain.
thought i to myself: "if these are the wild highlanders, i could wish my own folk wilder."
i not only started late, but i must have wandered nearly half the time.
true, i met plenty of people, grubbing in little miserable fields that would not keep a cat, or herding little kine about the bigness of asses.
the highland dress being forbidden by law since the rebellion, and the people condemned to the lowland habit, which they much disliked, it was strange to see the variety of their array.
some went bare, only for a hanging cloak or great-coat, and carried their trousers on their backs like a useless burthen: some had made an imitation of the tartan with little parti-coloured stripes patched together like an old wife's quilt; others, again, still wore the highland philabeg, but by putting a few stitches between the legs transformed it into a pair of trousers like a dutchman's.
all those makeshifts were condemned and punished, for the law was harshly applied, in hopes to break up the clan spirit; but in that out-of-the-way, sea-bound isle, there were few to make remarks and fewer to tell tales.
they seemed in great poverty; which was no doubt natural, now that rapine was put down, and the chiefs kept no longer an open house; and the roads -lrb- even such a wandering, country by-track as the one i followed -rrb- were infested with beggars.
and here again i marked a difference from my own part of the country.
for our lowland beggars -- even the gownsmen themselves, who beg by patent -- had a louting, flattering way with them, and if you gave them a plaek and asked change, would very civilly return you a boddle.
but these highland beggars stood on their dignity, asked alms only to buy snuff -lrb- by their account -rrb- and would give no change.
to be sure, this was no concern of mine, except in so far as it entertained me by the way.
what was much more to the purpose, few had any english, and these few -lrb- unless they were of the brotherhood of beggars -rrb- not very anxious to place it at my service.
i knew torosay to be my destination, and repeated the name to them and pointed; but instead of simply pointing in reply, they would give me a screed of the gaelic that set me foolish; so it was small wonder if i went out of my road as often as i stayed in it.
at last, about eight at night, and already very weary, i came to a lone house, where i asked admittance, and was refused, until i bethought me of the power of money in so poor a country, and held up one of my guineas in my finger and thumb.
thereupon, the man of the house, who had hitherto pretended to have no english, and driven me from his door by signals, suddenly began to speak as clearly as was needful, and agreed for five shillings to give me a night's lodging and guide me the next day to torosay.
i slept uneasily that night, fearing i should be robbed; but i might have spared myself the pain; for my host was no robber, only miserably poor and a great cheat.
he was not alone in his poverty; for the next morning, we must go five miles about to the house of what he called a rich man to have one of my guineas changed.
this was perhaps a rich man for mull; he would have scarce been thought so in the south; for it took all he had -- the whole house was turned upside down, and a neighbour brought under contribution, before he could scrape together twenty shillings in silver.
the odd shilling he kept for himself, protesting he could ill afford to have so great a sum of money lying "locked up."
for all that he was very courteous and well spoken, made us both sit down with his family to dinner, and brewed punch in a fine china bowl, over which my rascal guide grew so merry that he refused to start.
i was for getting angry, and appealed to the rich man -lrb- hector maclean was his name -rrb-, who had been a witness to our bargain and to my payment of the five shillings.
but maclean had taken his share of the punch, and vowed that no gentleman should leave his table after the bowl was brewed; so there was nothing for it but to sit and hear jacobite toasts and gaelic songs, till all were tipsy and staggered off to the bed or the barn for their night's rest.
next day -lrb- the fourth of my travels -rrb- we were up before five upon the clock; but my rascal guide got to the bottle at once, and it was three hours before i had him clear of the house, and then -lrb- as you shall hear -rrb- only for a worse disappointment.
as long as we went down a heathery valley that lay before mr. maclean's house, all went well; only my guide looked constantly over his shoulder, and when i asked him the cause, only grinned at me.
no sooner, however, had we crossed the back of a hill, and got out of sight of the house windows, than he told me torosay lay right in front, and that a hill-top -lrb- which he pointed out -rrb- was my best landmark.
""i care very little for that," said i, "since you are going with me."
the impudent cheat answered me in the gaelic that he had no english.
""my fine fellow," i said, "i know very well your english comes and goes.
tell me what will bring it back?
is it more money you wish?"
""five shillings mair," said he, "and hersel" will bring ye there."
i reflected awhile and then offered him two, which he accepted greedily, and insisted on having in his hands at once "for luck," as he said, but i think it was rather for my misfortune.
the two shillings carried him not quite as many miles; at the end of which distance, he sat down upon the wayside and took off his brogues from his feet, like a man about to rest.
i was now red-hot.
""ha!"
said i, "have you no more english?"
he said impudently, "no."
at that i boiled over, and lifted my hand to strike him; and he, drawing a knife from his rags, squatted back and grinned at me like a wildcat.
at that, forgetting everything but my anger, i ran in upon him, put aside his knife with my left, and struck him in the mouth with the right.
i was a strong lad and very angry, and he but a little man; and he went down before me heavily.
by good luck, his knife flew out of his hand as he fell.
i picked up both that and his brogues, wished him a good morning, and set off upon my way, leaving him barefoot and disarmed.
i chuckled to myself as i went, being sure i was done with that rogue, for a variety of reasons.
first, he knew he could have no more of my money; next, the brogues were worth in that country only a few pence; and, lastly, the knife, which was really a dagger, it was against the law for him to carry.
in about half an hour of walk, i overtook a great, ragged man, moving pretty fast but feeling before him with a staff.
he was quite blind, and told me he was a catechist, which should have put me at my ease.
but his face went against me; it seemed dark and dangerous and secret; and presently, as we began to go on alongside, i saw the steel butt of a pistol sticking from under the flap of his coat-pocket.
to carry such a thing meant a fine of fifteen pounds sterling upon a first offence, and transportation to the colonies upon a second.
nor could i quite see why a religious teacher should go armed, or what a blind man could be doing with a pistol.
i told him about my guide, for i was proud of what i had done, and my vanity for once got the heels of my prudence.
at the mention of the five shillings he cried out so loud that i made up my mind i should say nothing of the other two, and was glad he could not see my blushes.
""was it too much?"
i asked, a little faltering.
""too much!"
cries he.
""why, i will guide you to torosay myself for a dram of brandy.
and give you the great pleasure of my company -lrb- me that is a man of some learning -rrb- in the bargain."
i said i did not see how a blind man could be a guide; but at that he laughed aloud, and said his stick was eyes enough for an eagle.
""in the isle of mull, at least," says he, "where i know every stone and heather-bush by mark of head.
see, now," he said, striking right and left, as if to make sure, "down there a burn is running; and at the head of it there stands a bit of a small hill with a stone cocked upon the top of that; and it's hard at the foot of the hill, that the way runs by to torosay; and the way here, being for droves, is plainly trodden, and will show grassy through the heather."
i had to own he was right in every feature, and told my wonder.
""ha!"
says he, "that's nothing.
would ye believe me now, that before the act came out, and when there were weepons in this country, i could shoot?
ay, could i!"
cries he, and then with a leer: "if ye had such a thing as a pistol here to try with, i would show ye how it's done."
i told him i had nothing of the sort, and gave him a wider berth.
if he had known, his pistol stuck at that time quite plainly out of his pocket, and i could see the sun twinkle on the steel of the butt.
but by the better luck for me, he knew nothing, thought all was covered, and lied on in the dark.
he then began to question me cunningly, where i came from, whether i was rich, whether i could change a five-shilling piece for him -lrb- which he declared he had that moment in his sporran -rrb-, and all the time he kept edging up to me and i avoiding him.
we were now upon a sort of green cattle-track which crossed the hills towards torosay, and we kept changing sides upon that like dancers in a reel.
i had so plainly the upper-hand that my spirits rose, and indeed i took a pleasure in this game of blindman's buff; but the catechist grew angrier and angrier, and at last began to swear in gaelic and to strike for my legs with his staff.
then i told him that, sure enough, i had a pistol in my pocket as well as he, and if he did not strike across the hill due south i would even blow his brains out.
he became at once very polite, and after trying to soften me for some time, but quite in vain, he cursed me once more in gaelic and took himself off.
i watched him striding along, through bog and brier, tapping with his stick, until he turned the end of a hill and disappeared in the next hollow.
then i struck on again for torosay, much better pleased to be alone than to travel with that man of learning.
this was an unlucky day; and these two, of whom i had just rid myself, one after the other, were the two worst men i met with in the highlands.
at torosay, on the sound of mull and looking over to the mainland of morven, there was an inn with an innkeeper, who was a maclean, it appeared, of a very high family; for to keep an inn is thought even more genteel in the highlands than it is with us, perhaps as partaking of hospitality, or perhaps because the trade is idle and drunken.
he spoke good english, and finding me to be something of a scholar, tried me first in french, where he easily beat me, and then in the latin, in which i do n't know which of us did best.
this pleasant rivalry put us at once upon friendly terms; and i sat up and drank punch with him -lrb- or to be more correct, sat up and watched him drink it -rrb-, until he was so tipsy that he wept upon my shoulder.
i tried him, as if by accident, with a sight of alan's button; but it was plain he had never seen or heard of it.
indeed, he bore some grudge against the family and friends of ardshiel, and before he was drunk he read me a lampoon, in very good latin, but with a very ill meaning, which he had made in elegiac verses upon a person of that house.
when i told him of my catechist, he shook his head, and said i was lucky to have got clear off.
""that is a very dangerous man," he said; "duncan mackiegh is his name; he can shoot by the ear at several yards, and has been often accused of highway robberies, and once of murder."
""the cream of it is," says i, "that he called himself a catechist."
""and why should he not?"
says he, "when that is what he is.
it was maclean of duart gave it to him because he was blind.
but perhaps it was a peety," says my host, "for he is always on the road, going from one place to another to hear the young folk say their religion; and, doubtless, that is a great temptation to the poor man."
at last, when my landlord could drink no more, he showed me to a bed, and i lay down in very good spirits; having travelled the greater part of that big and crooked island of mull, from earraid to torosay, fifty miles as the crow flies, and -lrb- with my wanderings -rrb- much nearer a hundred, in four days and with little fatigue.
indeed i was by far in better heart and health of body at the end of that long tramp than i had been at the beginning.
chapter xvi the lad with the silver button: across morven there is a regular ferry from torosay to kinlochaline on the mainland.
both shores of the sound are in the country of the strong clan of the macleans, and the people that passed the ferry with me were almost all of that clan.
the skipper of the boat, on the other hand, was called neil roy macrob; and since macrob was one of the names of alan's clansmen, and alan himself had sent me to that ferry, i was eager to come to private speech of neil roy.
in the crowded boat this was of course impossible, and the passage was a very slow affair.
there was no wind, and as the boat was wretchedly equipped, we could pull but two oars on one side, and one on the other.
the men gave way, however, with a good will, the passengers taking spells to help them, and the whole company giving the time in gaelic boat-songs.
and what with the songs, and the sea-air, and the good-nature and spirit of all concerned, and the bright weather, the passage was a pretty thing to have seen.
but there was one melancholy part.
in the mouth of loch aline we found a great sea-going ship at anchor; and this i supposed at first to be one of the king's cruisers which were kept along that coast, both summer and winter, to prevent communication with the french.
as we got a little nearer, it became plain she was a ship of merchandise; and what still more puzzled me, not only her decks, but the sea-beach also, were quite black with people, and skiffs were continually plying to and fro between them.
yet nearer, and there began to come to our ears a great sound of mourning, the people on board and those on the shore crying and lamenting one to another so as to pierce the heart.
then i understood this was an emigrant ship bound for the american colonies.
we put the ferry-boat alongside, and the exiles leaned over the bulwarks, weeping and reaching out their hands to my fellow-passengers, among whom they counted some near friends.
how long this might have gone on i do not know, for they seemed to have no sense of time: but at last the captain of the ship, who seemed near beside himself -lrb- and no great wonder -rrb- in the midst of this crying and confusion, came to the side and begged us to depart.
thereupon neil sheered off; and the chief singer in our boat struck into a melancholy air, which was presently taken up both by the emigrants and their friends upon the beach, so that it sounded from all sides like a lament for the dying.
i saw the tears run down the cheeks of the men and women in the boat, even as they bent at the oars; and the circumstances and the music of the song -lrb- which is one called "lochaber no more" -rrb- were highly affecting even to myself.
at kinlochaline i got neil roy upon one side on the beach, and said i made sure he was one of appin's men.
""and what for no?"
said he.
""i am seeking somebody," said i; "and it comes in my mind that you will have news of him.
alan breck stewart is his name."
and very foolishly, instead of showing him the button, i sought to pass a shilling in his hand.
at this he drew back.
""i am very much affronted," he said; "and this is not the way that one shentleman should behave to another at all.
the man you ask for is in france; but if he was in my sporran," says he, "and your belly full of shillings, i would not hurt a hair upon his body."
i saw i had gone the wrong way to work, and without wasting time upon apologies, showed him the button lying in the hollow of my palm.
""aweel, aweel," said neil; "and i think ye might have begun with that end of the stick, whatever!
but if ye are the lad with the silver button, all is well, and i have the word to see that ye come safe.
but if ye will pardon me to speak plainly," says he, "there is a name that you should never take into your mouth, and that is the name of alan breck; and there is a thing that ye would never do, and that is to offer your dirty money to a hieland shentleman."
it was not very easy to apologise; for i could scarce tell him -lrb- what was the truth -rrb- that i had never dreamed he would set up to be a gentleman until he told me so.
neil on his part had no wish to prolong his dealings with me, only to fulfil his orders and be done with it; and he made haste to give me my route.
this was to lie the night in kinlochaline in the public inn; to cross morven the next day to ardgour, and lie the night in the house of one john of the claymore, who was warned that i might come; the third day, to be set across one loch at corran and another at balachulish, and then ask my way to the house of james of the glens, at aucharn in duror of appin.
there was a good deal of ferrying, as you hear; the sea in all this part running deep into the mountains and winding about their roots.
it makes the country strong to hold and difficult to travel, but full of prodigious wild and dreadful prospects.
i had some other advice from neil: to speak with no one by the way, to avoid whigs, campbells, and the "red-soldiers;" to leave the road and lie in a bush if i saw any of the latter coming, "for it was never chancy to meet in with them;" and in brief, to conduct myself like a robber or a jacobite agent, as perhaps neil thought me.
the inn at kinlochaline was the most beggarly vile place that ever pigs were styed in, full of smoke, vermin, and silent highlanders.
i was not only discontented with my lodging, but with myself for my mismanagement of neil, and thought i could hardly be worse off.
but very wrongly, as i was soon to see; for i had not been half an hour at the inn -lrb- standing in the door most of the time, to ease my eyes from the peat smoke -rrb- when a thunderstorm came close by, the springs broke in a little hill on which the inn stood, and one end of the house became a running water.
places of public entertainment were bad enough all over scotland in those days; yet it was a wonder to myself, when i had to go from the fireside to the bed in which i slept, wading over the shoes.
early in my next day's journey i overtook a little, stout, solemn man, walking very slowly with his toes turned out, sometimes reading in a book and sometimes marking the place with his finger, and dressed decently and plainly in something of a clerical style.
this i found to be another catechist, but of a different order from the blind man of mull: being indeed one of those sent out by the edinburgh society for propagating christian knowledge, to evangelise the more savage places of the highlands.
his name was henderland; he spoke with the broad south-country tongue, which i was beginning to weary for the sound of; and besides common countryship, we soon found we had a more particular bond of interest.
for my good friend, the minister of essendean, had translated into the gaelic in his by-time a number of hymns and pious books which henderland used in his work, and held in great esteem.
indeed, it was one of these he was carrying and reading when we met.
we fell in company at once, our ways lying together as far as to kingairloch.
as we went, he stopped and spoke with all the wayfarers and workers that we met or passed; and though of course i could not tell what they discoursed about, yet i judged mr. henderland must be well liked in the countryside, for i observed many of them to bring out their mulls and share a pinch of snuff with him.
i told him as far in my affairs as i judged wise; as far, that is, as they were none of alan's; and gave balachulish as the place i was travelling to, to meet a friend; for i thought aucharn, or even duror, would be too particular, and might put him on the scent.
on his part, he told me much of his work and the people he worked among, the hiding priests and jacobites, the disarming act, the dress, and many other curiosities of the time and place.
he seemed moderate; blaming parliament in several points, and especially because they had framed the act more severely against those who wore the dress than against those who carried weapons.
this moderation put it in my mind to question him of the red fox and the appin tenants; questions which, i thought, would seem natural enough in the mouth of one travelling to that country.
he said it was a bad business.
""it's wonderful," said he, "where the tenants find the money, for their life is mere starvation.
-lrb- ye do n't carry such a thing as snuff, do ye, mr. balfour?
no.
well, i'm better wanting it. -rrb-
but these tenants -lrb- as i was saying -rrb- are doubtless partly driven to it.
james stewart in duror -lrb- that's him they call james of the glens -rrb- is half-brother to ardshiel, the captain of the clan; and he is a man much looked up to, and drives very hard.
and then there's one they call alan breck --" "ah!"
i cried, "what of him?"
""what of the wind that bloweth where it listeth?"
said henderland.
""he's here and awa; here to-day and gone to-morrow: a fair heather-cat.
he might be glowering at the two of us out of yon whin-bush, and i wouldnae wonder!
ye'll no carry such a thing as snuff, will ye?"
i told him no, and that he had asked the same thing more than once.
""it's highly possible," said he, sighing.
""but it seems strange ye shouldnae carry it.
however, as i was saying, this alan breck is a bold, desperate customer, and well kent to be james's right hand.
his life is forfeit already; he would boggle at naething; and maybe, if a tenant-body was to hang back he would get a dirk in his wame."
""you make a poor story of it all, mr. henderland," said i. "if it is all fear upon both sides, i care to hear no more of it."
""na," said mr. henderland, "but there's love too, and self-denial that should put the like of you and me to shame.
there's something fine about it; no perhaps christian, but humanly fine.
even alan breck, by all that i hear, is a chield to be respected.
there's many a lying sneck-draw sits close in kirk in our own part of the country, and stands well in the world's eye, and maybe is a far worse man, mr. balfour, than yon misguided shedder of man's blood.
ay, ay, we might take a lesson by them.
-- ye'll perhaps think i've been too long in the hielands?"
he added, smiling to me.
i told him not at all; that i had seen much to admire among the highlanders; and if he came to that, mr. campbell himself was a highlander.
""ay," said he, "that's true.
it's a fine blood."
""and what is the king's agent about?"
i asked.
""colin campbell?"
says henderland.
""putting his head in a bees" byke!"
""he is to turn the tenants out by force, i hear?"
said i. "yes," says he, "but the business has gone back and forth, as folk say.
first, james of the glens rode to edinburgh, and got some lawyer -lrb- a stewart, nae doubt -- they all hing together like bats in a steeple -rrb- and had the proceedings stayed.
and then colin campbell cam" in again, and had the upper-hand before the barons of exchequer.
and now they tell me the first of the tenants are to flit to-morrow.
it's to begin at duror under james's very windows, which doesnae seem wise by my humble way of it."
""do you think they'll fight?"
i asked.
""well," says henderland, "they're disarmed -- or supposed to be -- for there's still a good deal of cold iron lying by in quiet places.
and then colin campbell has the sogers coming.
but for all that, if i was his lady wife, i wouldnae be well pleased till i got him home again.
they're queer customers, the appin stewarts."
i asked if they were worse than their neighbours.
""no they," said he.
""and that's the worst part of it.
for if colin roy can get his business done in appin, he has it all to begin again in the next country, which they call mamore, and which is one of the countries of the camerons.
he's king's factor upon both, and from both he has to drive out the tenants; and indeed, mr. balfour -lrb- to be open with ye -rrb-, it's my belief that if he escapes the one lot, he'll get his death by the other."
so we continued talking and walking the great part of the day; until at last, mr. henderland after expressing his delight in my company, and satisfaction at meeting with a friend of mr. campbell's -lrb- "whom," says he, "i will make bold to call that sweet singer of our covenanted zion" -rrb-, proposed that i should make a short stage, and lie the night in his house a little beyond kingairloch.
to say truth, i was overjoyed; for i had no great desire for john of the claymore, and since my double misadventure, first with the guide and next with the gentleman skipper, i stood in some fear of any highland stranger.
accordingly we shook hands upon the bargain, and came in the afternoon to a small house, standing alone by the shore of the linnhe loch.
the sun was already gone from the desert mountains of ardgour upon the hither side, but shone on those of appin on the farther; the loch lay as still as a lake, only the gulls were crying round the sides of it; and the whole place seemed solemn and uncouth.
we had no sooner come to the door of mr. henderland's dwelling, than to my great surprise -lrb- for i was now used to the politeness of highlanders -rrb- he burst rudely past me, dashed into the room, caught up a jar and a small horn-spoon, and began ladling snuff into his nose in most excessive quantities.
then he had a hearty fit of sneezing, and looked round upon me with a rather silly smile.
""it's a vow i took," says he.
""i took a vow upon me that i wouldnae carry it.
doubtless it's a great privation; but when i think upon the martyrs, not only to the scottish covenant but to other points of christianity, i think shame to mind it."
as soon as we had eaten -lrb- and porridge and whey was the best of the good man's diet -rrb- he took a grave face and said he had a duty to perform by mr. campbell, and that was to inquire into my state of mind towards god.
i was inclined to smile at him since the business of the snuff; but he had not spoken long before he brought the tears into my eyes.
there are two things that men should never weary of, goodness and humility; we get none too much of them in this rough world among cold, proud people; but mr. henderland had their very speech upon his tongue.
and though i was a good deal puffed up with my adventures and with having come off, as the saying is, with flying colours; yet he soon had me on my knees beside a simple, poor old man, and both proud and glad to be there.
before we went to bed he offered me sixpence to help me on my way, out of a scanty store he kept in the turf wall of his house; at which excess of goodness i knew not what to do.
but at last he was so earnest with me that i thought it the more mannerly part to let him have his way, and so left him poorer than myself.
chapter xvii the death of the red fox the next day mr. henderland found for me a man who had a boat of his own and was to cross the linnhe loch that afternoon into appin, fishing.
him he prevailed on to take me, for he was one of his flock; and in this way i saved a long day's travel and the price of the two public ferries i must otherwise have passed.
it was near noon before we set out; a dark day with clouds, and the sun shining upon little patches.
the sea was here very deep and still, and had scarce a wave upon it; so that i must put the water to my lips before i could believe it to be truly salt.
the mountains on either side were high, rough and barren, very black and gloomy in the shadow of the clouds, but all silver-laced with little watercourses where the sun shone upon them.
it seemed a hard country, this of appin, for people to care as much about as alan did.
there was but one thing to mention.
a little after we had started, the sun shone upon a little moving clump of scarlet close in along the water-side to the north.
it was much of the same red as soldiers" coats; every now and then, too, there came little sparks and lightnings, as though the sun had struck upon bright steel.
i asked my boatman what it should be, and he answered he supposed it was some of the red soldiers coming from fort william into appin, against the poor tenantry of the country.
well, it was a sad sight to me; and whether it was because of my thoughts of alan, or from something prophetic in my bosom, although this was but the second time i had seen king george's troops, i had no good will to them.
at last we came so near the point of land at the entering in of loch leven that i begged to be set on shore.
my boatman -lrb- who was an honest fellow and mindful of his promise to the catechist -rrb- would fain have carried me on to balachulish; but as this was to take me farther from my secret destination, i insisted, and was set on shore at last under the wood of lettermore -lrb- or lettervore, for i have heard it both ways -rrb- in alan's country of appin.
this was a wood of birches, growing on a steep, craggy side of a mountain that overhung the loch.
it had many openings and ferny howes; and a road or bridle track ran north and south through the midst of it, by the edge of which, where was a spring, i sat down to eat some oat-bread of mr. henderland's and think upon my situation.
here i was not only troubled by a cloud of stinging midges, but far more by the doubts of my mind.
what i ought to do, why i was going to join myself with an outlaw and a would-be murderer like alan, whether i should not be acting more like a man of sense to tramp back to the south country direct, by my own guidance and at my own charges, and what mr. campbell or even mr. henderland would think of me if they should ever learn my folly and presumption: these were the doubts that now began to come in on me stronger than ever.
as i was so sitting and thinking, a sound of men and horses came to me through the wood; and presently after, at a turning of the road, i saw four travellers come into view.
the way was in this part so rough and narrow that they came single and led their horses by the reins.
the first was a great, red-headed gentleman, of an imperious and flushed face, who carried his hat in his hand and fanned himself, for he was in a breathing heat.
the second, by his decent black garb and white wig, i correctly took to be a lawyer.
the third was a servant, and wore some part of his clothes in tartan, which showed that his master was of a highland family, and either an outlaw or else in singular good odour with the government, since the wearing of tartan was against the act.
if i had been better versed in these things, i would have known the tartan to be of the argyle -lrb- or campbell -rrb- colours.
this servant had a good-sized portmanteau strapped on his horse, and a net of lemons -lrb- to brew punch with -rrb- hanging at the saddle-bow; as was often enough the custom with luxurious travellers in that part of the country.
as for the fourth, who brought up the tail, i had seen his like before, and knew him at once to be a sheriff's officer.
i had no sooner seen these people coming than i made up my mind -lrb- for no reason that i can tell -rrb- to go through with my adventure; and when the first came alongside of me, i rose up from the bracken and asked him the way to aucharn.
he stopped and looked at me, as i thought, a little oddly; and then, turning to the lawyer, "mungo," said he, "there's many a man would think this more of a warning than two pyats.
here am i on my road to duror on the job ye ken; and here is a young lad starts up out of the bracken, and speers if i am on the way to aucharn."
""glenure," said the other, "this is an ill subject for jesting."
these two had now drawn close up and were gazing at me, while the two followers had halted about a stone-cast in the rear.
""and what seek ye in aucharn?"
said colin roy campbell of glenure, him they called the red fox; for he it was that i had stopped.
""the man that lives there," said i. "james of the glens," says glenure, musingly; and then to the lawyer: "is he gathering his people, think ye?"
""anyway," says the lawyer, "we shall do better to bide where we are, and let the soldiers rally us."
""if you are concerned for me," said i, "i am neither of his people nor yours, but an honest subject of king george, owing no man and fearing no man."
""why, very well said," replies the factor.
""but if i may make so bold as ask, what does this honest man so far from his country?
and why does he come seeking the brother of ardshiel?
i have power here, i must tell you.
i am king's factor upon several of these estates, and have twelve files of soldiers at my back."
""i have heard a waif word in the country," said i, a little nettled, "that you were a hard man to drive."
he still kept looking at me, as if in doubt.
""well," said he, at last, "your tongue is bold; but i am no unfriend to plainness.
if ye had asked me the way to the door of james stewart on any other day but this, i would have set ye right and bidden ye god speed.
but to-day -- eh, mungo?"
and he turned again to look at the lawyer.
but just as he turned there came the shot of a firelock from higher up the hill; and with the very sound of it glenure fell upon the road.
""o, i am dead!"
he cried, several times over.
the lawyer had caught him up and held him in his arms, the servant standing over and clasping his hands.
and now the wounded man looked from one to another with scared eyes, and there was a change in his voice, that went to the heart.
""take care of yourselves," says he.
""i am dead."
he tried to open his clothes as if to look for the wound, but his fingers slipped on the buttons.
with that he gave a great sigh, his head rolled on his shoulder, and he passed away.
the lawyer said never a word, but his face was as sharp as a pen and as white as the dead man's; the servant broke out into a great noise of crying and weeping, like a child; and i, on my side, stood staring at them in a kind of horror.
the sheriff's officer had run back at the first sound of the shot, to hasten the coming of the soldiers.
at last the lawyer laid down the dead man in his blood upon the road, and got to his own feet with a kind of stagger.
i believe it was his movement that brought me to my senses; for he had no sooner done so than i began to scramble up the hill, crying out, "the murderer!
the murderer!"
so little a time had elapsed, that when i got to the top of the first steepness, and could see some part of the open mountain, the murderer was still moving away at no great distance.
he was a big man, in a black coat, with metal buttons, and carried a long fowling-piece.
""here!"
i cried.
""i see him!"
at that the murderer gave a little, quick look over his shoulder, and began to run.
the next moment he was lost in a fringe of birches; then he came out again on the upper side, where i could see him climbing like a jackanapes, for that part was again very steep; and then he dipped behind a shoulder, and i saw him no more.
all this time i had been running on my side, and had got a good way up, when a voice cried upon me to stand.
i was at the edge of the upper wood, and so now, when i halted and looked back, i saw all the open part of the hill below me.
the lawyer and the sheriff's officer were standing just above the road, crying and waving on me to come back; and on their left, the red-coats, musket in hand, were beginning to struggle singly out of the lower wood.
""why should i come back?"
i cried.
""come you on!"
""ten pounds if ye take that lad!"
cried the lawyer.
""he's an accomplice.
he was posted here to hold us in talk."
at that word -lrb- which i could hear quite plainly, though it was to the soldiers and not to me that he was crying it -rrb- my heart came in my mouth with quite a new kind of terror.
indeed, it is one thing to stand the danger of your life, and quite another to run the peril of both life and character.
the thing, besides, had come so suddenly, like thunder out of a clear sky, that i was all amazed and helpless.
the soldiers began to spread, some of them to run, and others to put up their pieces and cover me; and still i stood.
""jock * in here among the trees," said a voice close by.
* duck.
indeed, i scarce knew what i was doing, but i obeyed; and as i did so, i heard the firelocks bang and the balls whistle in the birches.
just inside the shelter of the trees i found alan breck standing, with a fishing-rod.
he gave me no salutation; indeed it was no time for civilities; only "come!"
says he, and set off running along the side of the mountain towards balachulish; and i, like a sheep, to follow him.
now we ran among the birches; now stooping behind low humps upon the mountain-side; now crawling on all fours among the heather.
the pace was deadly: my heart seemed bursting against my ribs; and i had neither time to think nor breath to speak with.
only i remember seeing with wonder, that alan every now and then would straighten himself to his full height and look back; and every time he did so, there came a great far-away cheering and crying of the soldiers.
quarter of an hour later, alan stopped, clapped down flat in the heather, and turned to me.
""now," said he, "it's earnest.
do as i do, for your life."
and at the same speed, but now with infinitely more precaution, we traced back again across the mountain-side by the same way that we had come, only perhaps higher; till at last alan threw himself down in the upper wood of lettermore, where i had found him at the first, and lay, with his face in the bracken, panting like a dog.
my own sides so ached, my head so swam, my tongue so hung out of my mouth with heat and dryness, that i lay beside him like one dead.
chapter xviii i talk with alan in the wood of lettermore alan was the first to come round.
he rose, went to the border of the wood, peered out a little, and then returned and sat down.
""well," said he, "yon was a hot burst, david."
i said nothing, nor so much as lifted my face.
i had seen murder done, and a great, ruddy, jovial gentleman struck out of life in a moment; the pity of that sight was still sore within me, and yet that was but a part of my concern.
here was murder done upon the man alan hated; here was alan skulking in the trees and running from the troops; and whether his was the hand that fired or only the head that ordered, signified but little.
by my way of it, my only friend in that wild country was blood-guilty in the first degree; i held him in horror; i could not look upon his face; i would have rather lain alone in the rain on my cold isle, than in that warm wood beside a murderer.
""are ye still wearied?"
he asked again.
""no," said i, still with my face in the bracken; "no, i am not wearied now, and i can speak.
you and me must twine," * i said.
""i liked you very well, alan, but your ways are not mine, and they're not god's: and the short and the long of it is just that we must twine."
* part.
""i will hardly twine from ye, david, without some kind of reason for the same," said alan, mighty gravely.
""if ye ken anything against my reputation, it's the least thing that ye should do, for old acquaintance" sake, to let me hear the name of it; and if ye have only taken a distaste to my society, it will be proper for me to judge if i'm insulted."
""alan," said i, "what is the sense of this?
ye ken very well yon campbell-man lies in his blood upon the road."
he was silent for a little; then says he, "did ever ye hear tell of the story of the man and the good people?"
-- by which he meant the fairies.
""no," said i, "nor do i want to hear it."
""with your permission, mr. balfour, i will tell it you, whatever," says alan.
""the man, ye should ken, was cast upon a rock in the sea, where it appears the good people were in use to come and rest as they went through to ireland.
the name of this rock is called the skerryvore, and it's not far from where we suffered ship-wreck.
well, it seems the man cried so sore, if he could just see his little bairn before he died!
that at last the king of the good people took peety upon him, and sent one flying that brought back the bairn in a poke * and laid it down beside the man where he lay sleeping.
so when the man woke, there was a poke beside him and something into the inside of it that moved.
well, it seems he was one of these gentry that think aye the worst of things; and for greater security, he stuck his dirk throughout that poke before he opened it, and there was his bairn dead.
i am thinking to myself, mr. balfour, that you and the man are very much alike."
* bag.
""do you mean you had no hand in it?"
cried i, sitting up.
""i will tell you first of all, mr. balfour of shaws, as one friend to another," said alan, "that if i were going to kill a gentleman, it would not be in my own country, to bring trouble on my clan; and i would not go wanting sword and gun, and with a long fishing-rod upon my back."
""well," said i, "that's true!"
""and now," continued alan, taking out his dirk and laying his hand upon it in a certain manner, "i swear upon the holy iron i had neither art nor part, act nor thought in it."
""i thank god for that!"
cried i, and offered him my hand.
he did not appear to see it.
""and here is a great deal of work about a campbell!"
said he.
""they are not so scarce, that i ken!"
""at least," said i, "you can not justly blame me, for you know very well what you told me in the brig. but the temptation and the act are different, i thank god again for that.
we may all be tempted; but to take a life in cold blood, alan!"
and i could say no more for the moment.
""and do you know who did it?"
i added.
""do you know that man in the black coat?"
""i have nae clear mind about his coat," said alan cunningly, "but it sticks in my head that it was blue."
""blue or black, did ye know him?"
said i. "i couldnae just conscientiously swear to him," says alan.
""he gaed very close by me, to be sure, but it's a strange thing that i should just have been tying my brogues."
""can you swear that you do n't know him, alan?"
i cried, half angered, half in a mind to laugh at his evasions.
""not yet," says he; "but i've a grand memory for forgetting, david."
""and yet there was one thing i saw clearly," said i; "and that was, that you exposed yourself and me to draw the soldiers."
""it's very likely," said alan; "and so would any gentleman.
you and me were innocent of that transaction."
""the better reason, since we were falsely suspected, that we should get clear," i cried.
""the innocent should surely come before the guilty."
""why, david," said he, "the innocent have aye a chance to get assoiled in court; but for the lad that shot the bullet, i think the best place for him will be the heather.
them that havenae dipped their hands in any little difficulty, should be very mindful of the case of them that have.
and that is the good christianity.
for if it was the other way round about, and the lad whom i couldnae just clearly see had been in our shoes, and we in his -lrb- as might very well have been -rrb-, i think we would be a good deal obliged to him oursel's if he would draw the soldiers."
when it came to this, i gave alan up.
but he looked so innocent all the time, and was in such clear good faith in what he said, and so ready to sacrifice himself for what he deemed his duty, that my mouth was closed.
mr. henderland's words came back to me: that we ourselves might take a lesson by these wild highlanders.
well, here i had taken mine.
alan's morals were all tail-first; but he was ready to give his life for them, such as they were.
""alan," said i, "i'll not say it's the good christianity as i understand it, but it's good enough.
and here i offer ye my hand for the second time."
whereupon he gave me both of his, saying surely i had cast a spell upon him, for he could forgive me anything.
then he grew very grave, and said we had not much time to throw away, but must both flee that country: he, because he was a deserter, and the whole of appin would now be searched like a chamber, and every one obliged to give a good account of himself; and i, because i was certainly involved in the murder.
""o!"
says i, willing to give him a little lesson, "i have no fear of the justice of my country."
""as if this was your country!"
said he.
""or as if ye would be tried here, in a country of stewarts!"
""it's all scotland," said i. "man, i whiles wonder at ye," said alan.
""this is a campbell that's been killed.
well, it'll be tried in inverara, the campbells" head place; with fifteen campbells in the jury-box and the biggest campbell of all -lrb- and that's the duke -rrb- sitting cocking on the bench.
justice, david?
the same justice, by all the world, as glenure found awhile ago at the roadside."
this frightened me a little, i confess, and would have frightened me more if i had known how nearly exact were alan's predictions; indeed it was but in one point that he exaggerated, there being but eleven campbells on the jury; though as the other four were equally in the duke's dependence, it mattered less than might appear.
still, i cried out that he was unjust to the duke of argyle, who -lrb- for all he was a whig -rrb- was yet a wise and honest nobleman.
""hoot!"
said alan, "the man's a whig, nae doubt; but i would never deny he was a good chieftain to his clan.
and what would the clan think if there was a campbell shot, and naebody hanged, and their own chief the justice general?
but i have often observed," says alan, "that you low-country bodies have no clear idea of what's right and wrong."
at this i did at last laugh out aloud, when to my surprise, alan joined in, and laughed as merrily as myself.
""na, na," said he, "we're in the hielands, david; and when i tell ye to run, take my word and run.
nae doubt it's a hard thing to skulk and starve in the heather, but it's harder yet to lie shackled in a red-coat prison."
i asked him whither we should flee; and as he told me "to the lowlands," i was a little better inclined to go with him; for, indeed, i was growing impatient to get back and have the upper-hand of my uncle.
besides, alan made so sure there would be no question of justice in the matter, that i began to be afraid he might be right.
of all deaths, i would truly like least to die by the gallows; and the picture of that uncanny instrument came into my head with extraordinary clearness -lrb- as i had once seen it engraved at the top of a pedlar's ballad -rrb- and took away my appetite for courts of justice.
""i'll chance it, alan," said i. "i'll go with you."
""but mind you," said alan, "it's no small thing.
ye maun lie bare and hard, and brook many an empty belly.
your bed shall be the moorcock's, and your life shall be like the hunted deer's, and ye shall sleep with your hand upon your weapons.
ay, man, ye shall taigle many a weary foot, or we get clear!
i tell ye this at the start, for it's a life that i ken well.
but if ye ask what other chance ye have, i answer: nane.
either take to the heather with me, or else hang."
""and that's a choice very easily made," said i; and we shook hands upon it.
""and now let's take another keek at the red-coats," says alan, and he led me to the north-eastern fringe of the wood.
looking out between the trees, we could see a great side of mountain, running down exceeding steep into the waters of the loch.
it was a rough part, all hanging stone, and heather, and big scrogs of birchwood; and away at the far end towards balachulish, little wee red soldiers were dipping up and down over hill and howe, and growing smaller every minute.
there was no cheering now, for i think they had other uses for what breath was left them; but they still stuck to the trail, and doubtless thought that we were close in front of them.
alan watched them, smiling to himself.
""ay," said he, "they'll be gey weary before they've got to the end of that employ!
and so you and me, david, can sit down and eat a bite, and breathe a bit longer, and take a dram from my bottle.
then we'll strike for aucharn, the house of my kinsman, james of the glens, where i must get my clothes, and my arms, and money to carry us along; and then, david, we'll cry, "forth, fortune!"
and take a cast among the heather."
so we sat again and ate and drank, in a place whence we could see the sun going down into a field of great, wild, and houseless mountains, such as i was now condemned to wander in with my companion.
partly as we so sat, and partly afterwards, on the way to aucharn, each of us narrated his adventures; and i shall here set down so much of alan's as seems either curious or needful.
it appears he ran to the bulwarks as soon as the wave was passed; saw me, and lost me, and saw me again, as i tumbled in the roost; and at last had one glimpse of me clinging on the yard.
it was this that put him in some hope i would maybe get to land after all, and made him leave those clues and messages which had brought me -lrb- for my sins -rrb- to that unlucky country of appin.
in the meanwhile, those still on the brig had got the skiff launched, and one or two were on board of her already, when there came a second wave greater than the first, and heaved the brig out of her place, and would certainly have sent her to the bottom, had she not struck and caught on some projection of the reef.
when she had struck first, it had been bows-on, so that the stern had hitherto been lowest.
but now her stern was thrown in the air, and the bows plunged under the sea; and with that, the water began to pour into the fore-scuttle like the pouring of a mill-dam.
it took the colour out of alan's face, even to tell what followed.
for there were still two men lying impotent in their bunks; and these, seeing the water pour in and thinking the ship had foundered, began to cry out aloud, and that with such harrowing cries that all who were on deck tumbled one after another into the skiff and fell to their oars.
they were not two hundred yards away, when there came a third great sea; and at that the brig lifted clean over the reef; her canvas filled for a moment, and she seemed to sail in chase of them, but settling all the while; and presently she drew down and down, as if a hand was drawing her; and the sea closed over the covenant of dysart.
never a word they spoke as they pulled ashore, being stunned with the horror of that screaming; but they had scarce set foot upon the beach when hoseason woke up, as if out of a muse, and bade them lay hands upon alan.
they hung back indeed, having little taste for the employment; but hoseason was like a fiend, crying that alan was alone, that he had a great sum about him, that he had been the means of losing the brig and drowning all their comrades, and that here was both revenge and wealth upon a single cast.
it was seven against one; in that part of the shore there was no rock that alan could set his back to; and the sailors began to spread out and come behind him.
""and then," said alan, "the little man with the red head -- i havenae mind of the name that he is called."
""riach," said i. "ay" said alan, "riach!
well, it was him that took up the clubs for me, asked the men if they werenae feared of a judgment, and, says he "dod, i'll put my back to the hielandman's mysel"."
that's none such an entirely bad little man, yon little man with the red head," said alan.
""he has some spunks of decency."
""well," said i, "he was kind to me in his way."
""and so he was to alan," said he; "and by my troth, i found his way a very good one!
but ye see, david, the loss of the ship and the cries of these poor lads sat very ill upon the man; and i'm thinking that would be the cause of it."
""well, i would think so," says i; "for he was as keen as any of the rest at the beginning.
but how did hoseason take it?"
""it sticks in my mind that he would take it very ill," says alan.
""but the little man cried to me to run, and indeed i thought it was a good observe, and ran.
the last that i saw they were all in a knot upon the beach, like folk that were not agreeing very well together."
""what do you mean by that?"
said i. "well, the fists were going," said alan; "and i saw one man go down like a pair of breeks.
but i thought it would be better no to wait.
ye see there's a strip of campbells in that end of mull, which is no good company for a gentleman like me.
if it hadnae been for that i would have waited and looked for ye mysel", let alone giving a hand to the little man."
-lrb- it was droll how alan dwelt on mr. riach's stature, for, to say the truth, the one was not much smaller than the other. -rrb-
""so," says he, continuing, "i set my best foot forward, and whenever i met in with any one i cried out there was a wreck ashore.
man, they didnae stop to fash with me!
ye should have seen them linking for the beach!
and when they got there they found they had had the pleasure of a run, which is aye good for a campbell.
i'm thinking it was a judgment on the clan that the brig went down in the lump and didnae break.
but it was a very unlucky thing for you, that same; for if any wreck had come ashore they would have hunted high and low, and would soon have found ye."
chapter xix the house of fear night fell as we were walking, and the clouds, which had broken up in the afternoon, settled in and thickened, so that it fell, for the season of the year, extremely dark.
the way we went was over rough mountainsides; and though alan pushed on with an assured manner, i could by no means see how he directed himself.
at last, about half-past ten of the clock, we came to the top of a brae, and saw lights below us.
it seemed a house door stood open and let out a beam of fire and candle-light; and all round the house and steading five or six persons were moving hurriedly about, each carrying a lighted brand.
""james must have tint his wits," said alan.
""if this was the soldiers instead of you and me, he would be in a bonny mess.
but i dare say he'll have a sentry on the road, and he would ken well enough no soldiers would find the way that we came."
hereupon he whistled three times, in a particular manner.
it was strange to see how, at the first sound of it, all the moving torches came to a stand, as if the bearers were affrighted; and how, at the third, the bustle began again as before.
having thus set folks" minds at rest, we came down the brae, and were met at the yard gate -lrb- for this place was like a well-doing farm -rrb- by a tall, handsome man of more than fifty, who cried out to alan in the gaelic.
""james stewart," said alan, "i will ask ye to speak in scotch, for here is a young gentleman with me that has nane of the other.
this is him," he added, putting his arm through mine, "a young gentleman of the lowlands, and a laird in his country too, but i am thinking it will be the better for his health if we give his name the go-by."
james of the glens turned to me for a moment, and greeted me courteously enough; the next he had turned to alan.
""this has been a dreadful accident," he cried.
""it will bring trouble on the country."
and he wrung his hands.
""hoots!"
said alan, "ye must take the sour with the sweet, man.
colin roy is dead, and be thankful for that!"
""ay" said james, "and by my troth, i wish he was alive again!
it's all very fine to blow and boast beforehand; but now it's done, alan; and who's to bear the wyte * of it?
the accident fell out in appin -- mind ye that, alan; it's appin that must pay; and i am a man that has a family."
* blame.
while this was going on i looked about me at the servants.
some were on ladders, digging in the thatch of the house or the farm buildings, from which they brought out guns, swords, and different weapons of war; others carried them away; and by the sound of mattock blows from somewhere farther down the brae, i suppose they buried them.
though they were all so busy, there prevailed no kind of order in their efforts; men struggled together for the same gun and ran into each other with their burning torches; and james was continually turning about from his talk with alan, to cry out orders which were apparently never understood.
the faces in the torchlight were like those of people overborne with hurry and panic; and though none spoke above his breath, their speech sounded both anxious and angry.
it was about this time that a lassie came out of the house carrying a pack or bundle; and it has often made me smile to think how alan's instinct awoke at the mere sight of it.
""what's that the lassie has?"
he asked.
""we're just setting the house in order, alan," said james, in his frightened and somewhat fawning way.
""they'll search appin with candles, and we must have all things straight.
we're digging the bit guns and swords into the moss, ye see; and these, i am thinking, will be your ain french clothes.
we'll be to bury them, i believe."
""bury my french clothes!"
cried alan.
""troth, no!"
and he laid hold upon the packet and retired into the barn to shift himself, recommending me in the meanwhile to his kinsman.
james carried me accordingly into the kitchen, and sat down with me at table, smiling and talking at first in a very hospitable manner.
but presently the gloom returned upon him; he sat frowning and biting his fingers; only remembered me from time to time; and then gave me but a word or two and a poor smile, and back into his private terrors.
his wife sat by the fire and wept, with her face in her hands; his eldest son was crouched upon the floor, running over a great mass of papers and now and again setting one alight and burning it to the bitter end; all the while a servant lass with a red face was rummaging about the room, in a blind hurry of fear, and whimpering as she went; and every now and again one of the men would thrust in his face from the yard, and cry for orders.
at last james could keep his seat no longer, and begged my permission to be so unmannerly as walk about.
""i am but poor company altogether, sir," says he, "but i can think of nothing but this dreadful accident, and the trouble it is like to bring upon quite innocent persons."
a little after he observed his son burning a paper which he thought should have been kept; and at that his excitement burst out so that it was painful to witness.
he struck the lad repeatedly.
""are you gone gyte?"
* he cried.
""do you wish to hang your father?"
and forgetful of my presence, carried on at him a long time together in the gaelic, the young man answering nothing; only the wife, at the name of hanging, throwing her apron over her face and sobbing out louder than before.
* mad.
this was all wretched for a stranger like myself to hear and see; and i was right glad when alan returned, looking like himself in his fine french clothes, though -lrb- to be sure -rrb- they were now grown almost too battered and withered to deserve the name of fine.
i was then taken out in my turn by another of the sons, and given that change of clothing of which i had stood so long in need, and a pair of highland brogues made of deer-leather, rather strange at first, but after a little practice very easy to the feet.
by the time i came back alan must have told his story; for it seemed understood that i was to fly with him, and they were all busy upon our equipment.
they gave us each a sword and pistols, though i professed my inability to use the former; and with these, and some ammunition, a bag of oatmeal, an iron pan, and a bottle of right french brandy, we were ready for the heather.
money, indeed, was lacking.
i had about two guineas left; alan's belt having been despatched by another hand, that trusty messenger had no more than seventeen-pence to his whole fortune; and as for james, it appears he had brought himself so low with journeys to edinburgh and legal expenses on behalf of the tenants, that he could only scrape together three-and-five-pence-halfpenny, the most of it in coppers.
""this'll no do," said alan.
""ye must find a safe bit somewhere near by," said james, "and get word sent to me.
ye see, ye'll have to get this business prettily off, alan.
this is no time to be stayed for a guinea or two.
they're sure to get wind of ye, sure to seek ye, and by my way of it, sure to lay on ye the wyte of this day's accident.
if it falls on you, it falls on me that am your near kinsman and harboured ye while ye were in the country.
and if it comes on me --" he paused, and bit his fingers, with a white face.
""it would be a painful thing for our friends if i was to hang," said he.
""it would be an ill day for appin," says alan.
""it's a day that sticks in my throat," said james.
""o man, man, man -- man alan!
you and me have spoken like two fools!"
he cried, striking his hand upon the wall so that the house rang again.
""well, and that's true, too," said alan; "and my friend from the lowlands here" -lrb- nodding at me -rrb- "gave me a good word upon that head, if i would only have listened to him."
""but see here," said james, returning to his former manner, "if they lay me by the heels, alan, it's then that you'll be needing the money.
for with all that i have said and that you have said, it will look very black against the two of us; do ye mark that?
well, follow me out, and ye'll, i'll see that i'll have to get a paper out against ye mysel"; have to offer a reward for ye; ay, will i!
it's a sore thing to do between such near friends; but if i get the dirdum * of this dreadful accident, i'll have to fend for myself, man.
do ye see that?"
* blame.
he spoke with a pleading earnestness, taking alan by the breast of the coat.
""ay" said alan, "i see that."
""and ye'll have to be clear of the country, alan -- ay, and clear of scotland -- you and your friend from the lowlands, too.
for i'll have to paper your friend from the lowlands.
ye see that, alan -- say that ye see that!"
i thought alan flushed a bit.
""this is unco hard on me that brought him here, james," said he, throwing his head back.
""it's like making me a traitor!"
""now, alan, man!"
cried james.
""look things in the face!
he'll be papered anyway; mungo campbell'll be sure to paper him; what matters if i paper him too?
and then, alan, i am a man that has a family."
and then, after a little pause on both sides, "and, alan, it'll be a jury of campbells," said he.
""there's one thing," said alan, musingly, "that naebody kens his name."
""nor yet they shallnae, alan!
there's my hand on that," cried james, for all the world as if he had really known my name and was foregoing some advantage.
""but just the habit he was in, and what he looked like, and his age, and the like?
i couldnae well do less."
""i wonder at your father's son," cried alan, sternly.
""would ye sell the lad with a gift?
would ye change his clothes and then betray him?"
""no, no, alan," said james.
""no, no: the habit he took off -- the habit mungo saw him in."
but i thought he seemed crestfallen; indeed, he was clutching at every straw, and all the time, i dare say, saw the faces of his hereditary foes on the bench, and in the jury-box, and the gallows in the background.
""well, sir," says alan, turning to me, "what say ye to that?
ye are here under the safeguard of my honour; and it's my part to see nothing done but what shall please you."
""i have but one word to say," said i; "for to all this dispute i am a perfect stranger.
but the plain common-sense is to set the blame where it belongs, and that is on the man who fired the shot.
paper him, as ye call it, set the hunt on him; and let honest, innocent folk show their faces in safety."
but at this both alan and james cried out in horror; bidding me hold my tongue, for that was not to be thought of; and asking me what the camerons would think?
-lrb- which confirmed me, it must have been a cameron from mamore that did the act -rrb- and if i did not see that the lad might be caught?
""ye havenae surely thought of that?"
said they, with such innocent earnestness, that my hands dropped at my side and i despaired of argument.
""very well, then," said i, "paper me, if you please, paper alan, paper king george!
we're all three innocent, and that seems to be what's wanted.
but at least, sir," said i to james, recovering from my little fit of annoyance, "i am alan's friend, and if i can be helpful to friends of his, i will not stumble at the risk."
i thought it best to put a fair face on my consent, for i saw alan troubled; and, besides -lrb- thinks i to myself -rrb-, as soon as my back is turned, they will paper me, as they call it, whether i consent or not.
but in this i saw i was wrong; for i had no sooner said the words, than mrs. stewart leaped out of her chair, came running over to us, and wept first upon my neck and then on alan's, blessing god for our goodness to her family.
""as for you, alan, it was no more than your bounden duty," she said.
""but for this lad that has come here and seen us at our worst, and seen the goodman fleeching like a suitor, him that by rights should give his commands like any king -- as for you, my lad," she says, "my heart is wae not to have your name, but i have your face; and as long as my heart beats under my bosom, i will keep it, and think of it, and bless it."
and with that she kissed me, and burst once more into such sobbing, that i stood abashed.
""hoot, hoot," said alan, looking mighty silly.
""the day comes unco soon in this month of july; and to-morrow there'll be a fine to-do in appin, a fine riding of dragoons, and crying of "cruachan!"
* and running of red-coats; and it behoves you and me to the sooner be gone."
* the rallying-word of the campbells.
thereupon we said farewell, and set out again, bending somewhat eastwards, in a fine mild dark night, and over much the same broken country as before.
chapter xx the flight in the heather: the rocks sometimes we walked, sometimes ran; and as it drew on to morning, walked ever the less and ran the more.
though, upon its face, that country appeared to be a desert, yet there were huts and houses of the people, of which we must have passed more than twenty, hidden in quiet places of the hills.
when we came to one of these, alan would leave me in the way, and go himself and rap upon the side of the house and speak awhile at the window with some sleeper awakened.
this was to pass the news; which, in that country, was so much of a duty that alan must pause to attend to it even while fleeing for his life; and so well attended to by others, that in more than half of the houses where we called they had heard already of the murder.
in the others, as well as i could make out -lrb- standing back at a distance and hearing a strange tongue -rrb-, the news was received with more of consternation than surprise.
for all our hurry, day began to come in while we were still far from any shelter.
it found us in a prodigious valley, strewn with rocks and where ran a foaming river.
wild mountains stood around it; there grew there neither grass nor trees; and i have sometimes thought since then, that it may have been the valley called glencoe, where the massacre was in the time of king william.
but for the details of our itinerary, i am all to seek; our way lying now by short cuts, now by great detours; our pace being so hurried, our time of journeying usually by night; and the names of such places as i asked and heard being in the gaelic tongue and the more easily forgotten.
the first peep of morning, then, showed us this horrible place, and i could see alan knit his brow.
""this is no fit place for you and me," he said.
""this is a place they're bound to watch."
and with that he ran harder than ever down to the water-side, in a part where the river was split in two among three rocks.
it went through with a horrid thundering that made my belly quake; and there hung over the lynn a little mist of spray.
alan looked neither to the right nor to the left, but jumped clean upon the middle rock and fell there on his hands and knees to check himself, for that rock was small and he might have pitched over on the far side.
i had scarce time to measure the distance or to understand the peril before i had followed him, and he had caught and stopped me.
so there we stood, side by side upon a small rock slippery with spray, a far broader leap in front of us, and the river dinning upon all sides.
when i saw where i was, there came on me a deadly sickness of fear, and i put my hand over my eyes.
alan took me and shook me; i saw he was speaking, but the roaring of the falls and the trouble of my mind prevented me from hearing; only i saw his face was red with anger, and that he stamped upon the rock.
the same look showed me the water raging by, and the mist hanging in the air: and with that i covered my eyes again and shuddered.
the next minute alan had set the brandy bottle to my lips, and forced me to drink about a gill, which sent the blood into my head again.
then, putting his hands to his mouth, and his mouth to my ear, he shouted, "hang or drown!"
and turning his back upon me, leaped over the farther branch of the stream, and landed safe.
i was now alone upon the rock, which gave me the more room; the brandy was singing in my ears; i had this good example fresh before me, and just wit enough to see that if i did not leap at once, i should never leap at all.
i bent low on my knees and flung myself forth, with that kind of anger of despair that has sometimes stood me in stead of courage.
sure enough, it was but my hands that reached the full length; these slipped, caught again, slipped again; and i was sliddering back into the lynn, when alan seized me, first by the hair, then by the collar, and with a great strain dragged me into safety.
never a word he said, but set off running again for his life, and i must stagger to my feet and run after him.
i had been weary before, but now i was sick and bruised, and partly drunken with the brandy; i kept stumbling as i ran, i had a stitch that came near to overmaster me; and when at last alan paused under a great rock that stood there among a number of others, it was none too soon for david balfour.
a great rock i have said; but by rights it was two rocks leaning together at the top, both some twenty feet high, and at the first sight inaccessible.
even alan -lrb- though you may say he had as good as four hands -rrb- failed twice in an attempt to climb them; and it was only at the third trial, and then by standing on my shoulders and leaping up with such force as i thought must have broken my collar-bone, that he secured a lodgment.
once there, he let down his leathern girdle; and with the aid of that and a pair of shallow footholds in the rock, i scrambled up beside him.
then i saw why we had come there; for the two rocks, being both somewhat hollow on the top and sloping one to the other, made a kind of dish or saucer, where as many as three or four men might have lain hidden.
all this while alan had not said a word, and had run and climbed with such a savage, silent frenzy of hurry, that i knew that he was in mortal fear of some miscarriage.
even now we were on the rock he said nothing, nor so much as relaxed the frowning look upon his face; but clapped flat down, and keeping only one eye above the edge of our place of shelter scouted all round the compass.
the dawn had come quite clear; we could see the stony sides of the valley, and its bottom, which was bestrewed with rocks, and the river, which went from one side to another, and made white falls; but nowhere the smoke of a house, nor any living creature but some eagles screaming round a cliff.
then at last alan smiled.
""ay" said he, "now we have a chance;" and then looking at me with some amusement, "ye're no very gleg * at the jumping," said he.
* brisk.
at this i suppose i coloured with mortification, for he added at once, "hoots!
small blame to ye!
to be feared of a thing and yet to do it, is what makes the prettiest kind of a man.
and then there was water there, and water's a thing that dauntons even me.
no, no," said alan, "it's no you that's to blame, it's me."
i asked him why.
""why," said he, "i have proved myself a gomeral this night.
for first of all i take a wrong road, and that in my own country of appin; so that the day has caught us where we should never have been; and thanks to that, we lie here in some danger and mair discomfort.
and next -lrb- which is the worst of the two, for a man that has been so much among the heather as myself -rrb- i have come wanting a water-bottle, and here we lie for a long summer's day with naething but neat spirit.
ye may think that a small matter; but before it comes night, david, ye'll give me news of it."
i was anxious to redeem my character, and offered, if he would pour out the brandy, to run down and fill the bottle at the river.
""i wouldnae waste the good spirit either," says he.
""it's been a good friend to you this night; or in my poor opinion, ye would still be cocking on yon stone.
and what's mair," says he, "ye may have observed -lrb- you that's a man of so much penetration -rrb- that alan breck stewart was perhaps walking quicker than his ordinar"."
""you!"
i cried, "you were running fit to burst."
""was i so?"
said he.
""well, then, ye may depend upon it, there was nae time to be lost.
and now here is enough said; gang you to your sleep, lad, and i'll watch."
accordingly, i lay down to sleep; a little peaty earth had drifted in between the top of the two rocks, and some bracken grew there, to be a bed to me; the last thing i heard was still the crying of the eagles.
i dare say it would be nine in the morning when i was roughly awakened, and found alan's hand pressed upon my mouth.
""wheesht!"
he whispered.
""ye were snoring."
""well," said i, surprised at his anxious and dark face, "and why not?"
he peered over the edge of the rock, and signed to me to do the like.
it was now high day, cloudless, and very hot.
the valley was as clear as in a picture.
about half a mile up the water was a camp of red-coats; a big fire blazed in their midst, at which some were cooking; and near by, on the top of a rock about as high as ours, there stood a sentry, with the sun sparkling on his arms.
all the way down along the river-side were posted other sentries; here near together, there widelier scattered; some planted like the first, on places of command, some on the ground level and marching and counter-marching, so as to meet half-way.
higher up the glen, where the ground was more open, the chain of posts was continued by horse-soldiers, whom we could see in the distance riding to and fro.
lower down, the infantry continued; but as the stream was suddenly swelled by the confluence of a considerable burn, they were more widely set, and only watched the fords and stepping-stones.
i took but one look at them, and ducked again into my place.
it was strange indeed to see this valley, which had lain so solitary in the hour of dawn, bristling with arms and dotted with the red coats and breeches.
""ye see," said alan, "this was what i was afraid of, davie: that they would watch the burn-side.
they began to come in about two hours ago, and, man!
but ye're a grand hand at the sleeping!
we're in a narrow place.
if they get up the sides of the hill, they could easy spy us with a glass; but if they'll only keep in the foot of the valley, we'll do yet.
the posts are thinner down the water; and, come night, we'll try our hand at getting by them."
""and what are we to do till night?"
i asked.
""lie here," says he, "and birstle."
that one good scotch word, "birstle," was indeed the most of the story of the day that we had now to pass.
you are to remember that we lay on the bare top of a rock, like scones upon a girdle; the sun beat upon us cruelly; the rock grew so heated, a man could scarce endure the touch of it; and the little patch of earth and fern, which kept cooler, was only large enough for one at a time.
we took turn about to lie on the naked rock, which was indeed like the position of that saint that was martyred on a gridiron; and it ran in my mind how strange it was, that in the same climate and at only a few days" distance, i should have suffered so cruelly, first from cold upon my island and now from heat upon this rock.
all the while we had no water, only raw brandy for a drink, which was worse than nothing; but we kept the bottle as cool as we could, burying it in the earth, and got some relief by bathing our breasts and temples.
the soldiers kept stirring all day in the bottom of the valley, now changing guard, now in patrolling parties hunting among the rocks.
these lay round in so great a number, that to look for men among them was like looking for a needle in a bottle of hay; and being so hopeless a task, it was gone about with the less care.
yet we could see the soldiers pike their bayonets among the heather, which sent a cold thrill into my vitals; and they would sometimes hang about our rock, so that we scarce dared to breathe.
it was in this way that i first heard the right english speech; one fellow as he went by actually clapping his hand upon the sunny face of the rock on which we lay, and plucking it off again with an oath.
""i tell you it's "ot," says he; and i was amazed at the clipping tones and the odd sing-song in which he spoke, and no less at that strange trick of dropping out the letter "h." to be sure, i had heard ransome; but he had taken his ways from all sorts of people, and spoke so imperfectly at the best, that i set down the most of it to childishness.
my surprise was all the greater to hear that manner of speaking in the mouth of a grown man; and indeed i have never grown used to it; nor yet altogether with the english grammar, as perhaps a very critical eye might here and there spy out even in these memoirs.
the tediousness and pain of these hours upon the rock grew only the greater as the day went on; the rock getting still the hotter and the sun fiercer.
there were giddiness, and sickness, and sharp pangs like rheumatism, to be supported.
i minded then, and have often minded since, on the lines in our scotch psalm: -- "the moon by night thee shall not smite, nor yet the sun by day;" and indeed it was only by god's blessing that we were neither of us sun-smitten.
at last, about two, it was beyond men's bearing, and there was now temptation to resist, as well as pain to thole.
for the sun being now got a little into the west, there came a patch of shade on the east side of our rock, which was the side sheltered from the soldiers.
""as well one death as another," said alan, and slipped over the edge and dropped on the ground on the shadowy side.
i followed him at once, and instantly fell all my length, so weak was i and so giddy with that long exposure.
here, then, we lay for an hour or two, aching from head to foot, as weak as water, and lying quite naked to the eye of any soldier who should have strolled that way.
none came, however, all passing by on the other side; so that our rock continued to be our shield even in this new position.
presently we began again to get a little strength; and as the soldiers were now lying closer along the river-side, alan proposed that we should try a start.
i was by this time afraid of but one thing in the world; and that was to be set back upon the rock; anything else was welcome to me; so we got ourselves at once in marching order, and began to slip from rock to rock one after the other, now crawling flat on our bellies in the shade, now making a run for it, heart in mouth.
the soldiers, having searched this side of the valley after a fashion, and being perhaps somewhat sleepy with the sultriness of the afternoon, had now laid by much of their vigilance, and stood dozing at their posts or only kept a look-out along the banks of the river; so that in this way, keeping down the valley and at the same time towards the mountains, we drew steadily away from their neighbourhood.
but the business was the most wearing i had ever taken part in.
a man had need of a hundred eyes in every part of him, to keep concealed in that uneven country and within cry of so many and scattered sentries.
when we must pass an open place, quickness was not all, but a swift judgment not only of the lie of the whole country, but of the solidity of every stone on which we must set foot; for the afternoon was now fallen so breathless that the rolling of a pebble sounded abroad like a pistol shot, and would start the echo calling among the hills and cliffs.
by sundown we had made some distance, even by our slow rate of progress, though to be sure the sentry on the rock was still plainly in our view.
but now we came on something that put all fears out of season; and that was a deep rushing burn, that tore down, in that part, to join the glen river.
at the sight of this we cast ourselves on the ground and plunged head and shoulders in the water; and i can not tell which was the more pleasant, the great shock as the cool stream went over us, or the greed with which we drank of it.
we lay there -lrb- for the banks hid us -rrb-, drank again and again, bathed our chests, let our wrists trail in the running water till they ached with the chill; and at last, being wonderfully renewed, we got out the meal-bag and made drammach in the iron pan.
this, though it is but cold water mingled with oatmeal, yet makes a good enough dish for a hungry man; and where there are no means of making fire, or -lrb- as in our case -rrb- good reason for not making one, it is the chief stand-by of those who have taken to the heather.
as soon as the shadow of the night had fallen, we set forth again, at first with the same caution, but presently with more boldness, standing our full height and stepping out at a good pace of walking.
the way was very intricate, lying up the steep sides of mountains and along the brows of cliffs; clouds had come in with the sunset, and the night was dark and cool; so that i walked without much fatigue, but in continual fear of falling and rolling down the mountains, and with no guess at our direction.
the moon rose at last and found us still on the road; it was in its last quarter, and was long beset with clouds; but after awhile shone out and showed me many dark heads of mountains, and was reflected far underneath us on the narrow arm of a sea-loch.
at this sight we both paused: i struck with wonder to find myself so high and walking -lrb- as it seemed to me -rrb- upon clouds; alan to make sure of his direction.
seemingly he was well pleased, and he must certainly have judged us out of ear-shot of all our enemies; for throughout the rest of our night-march he beguiled the way with whistling of many tunes, warlike, merry, plaintive; reel tunes that made the foot go faster; tunes of my own south country that made me fain to be home from my adventures; and all these, on the great, dark, desert mountains, making company upon the way.
chapter xxi the flight in the heather: the heugh of corrynakiegh early as day comes in the beginning of july, it was still dark when we reached our destination, a cleft in the head of a great mountain, with a water running through the midst, and upon the one hand a shallow cave in a rock.
birches grew there in a thin, pretty wood, which a little farther on was changed into a wood of pines.
the burn was full of trout; the wood of cushat-doves; on the open side of the mountain beyond, whaups would be always whistling, and cuckoos were plentiful.
from the mouth of the cleft we looked down upon a part of mamore, and on the sea-loch that divides that country from appin; and this from so great a height as made it my continual wonder and pleasure to sit and behold them.
the name of the cleft was the heugh of corrynakiegh; and although from its height and being so near upon the sea, it was often beset with clouds, yet it was on the whole a pleasant place, and the five days we lived in it went happily.
we slept in the cave, making our bed of heather bushes which we cut for that purpose, and covering ourselves with alan's great-coat.
there was a low concealed place, in a turning of the glen, where we were so bold as to make fire: so that we could warm ourselves when the clouds set in, and cook hot porridge, and grill the little trouts that we caught with our hands under the stones and overhanging banks of the burn.
this was indeed our chief pleasure and business; and not only to save our meal against worse times, but with a rivalry that much amused us, we spent a great part of our days at the water-side, stripped to the waist and groping about or -lrb- as they say -rrb- guddling for these fish.
the largest we got might have been a quarter of a pound; but they were of good flesh and flavour, and when broiled upon the coals, lacked only a little salt to be delicious.
in any by-time alan must teach me to use my sword, for my ignorance had much distressed him; and i think besides, as i had sometimes the upper-hand of him in the fishing, he was not sorry to turn to an exercise where he had so much the upper-hand of me.
he made it somewhat more of a pain than need have been, for he stormed at me all through the lessons in a very violent manner of scolding, and would push me so close that i made sure he must run me through the body.
i was often tempted to turn tail, but held my ground for all that, and got some profit of my lessons; if it was but to stand on guard with an assured countenance, which is often all that is required.
so, though i could never in the least please my master, i was not altogether displeased with myself.
in the meanwhile, you are not to suppose that we neglected our chief business, which was to get away.
""it will be many a long day," alan said to me on our first morning, "before the red-coats think upon seeking corrynakiegh; so now we must get word sent to james, and he must find the siller for us."
""and how shall we send that word?"
says i. "we are here in a desert place, which yet we dare not leave; and unless ye get the fowls of the air to be your messengers, i see not what we shall be able to do."
""ay?"
said alan.
""ye're a man of small contrivance, david."
thereupon he fell in a muse, looking in the embers of the fire; and presently, getting a piece of wood, he fashioned it in a cross, the four ends of which he blackened on the coals.
then he looked at me a little shyly.
""could ye lend me my button?"
says he.
""it seems a strange thing to ask a gift again, but i own i am laith to cut another."
i gave him the button; whereupon he strung it on a strip of his great-coat which he had used to bind the cross; and tying in a little sprig of birch and another of fir, he looked upon his work with satisfaction.
""now," said he, "there is a little clachan" -lrb- what is called a hamlet in the english -rrb- "not very far from corrynakiegh, and it has the name of koalisnacoan.
there there are living many friends of mine whom i could trust with my life, and some that i am no just so sure of.
ye see, david, there will be money set upon our heads; james himsel" is to set money on them; and as for the campbells, they would never spare siller where there was a stewart to be hurt.
if it was otherwise, i would go down to koalisnacoan whatever, and trust my life into these people's hands as lightly as i would trust another with my glove."
""but being so?"
said i. "being so," said he, "i would as lief they didnae see me.
there's bad folk everywhere, and what's far worse, weak ones.
so when it comes dark again, i will steal down into that clachan, and set this that i have been making in the window of a good friend of mine, john breck maccoll, a bouman * of appin's."
* a bouman is a tenant who takes stock from the landlord and shares with him the increase.
""with all my heart," says i; "and if he finds it, what is he to think?"
""well," says alan, "i wish he was a man of more penetration, for by my troth i am afraid he will make little enough of it!
but this is what i have in my mind.
this cross is something in the nature of the crosstarrie, or fiery cross, which is the signal of gathering in our clans; yet he will know well enough the clan is not to rise, for there it is standing in his window, and no word with it.
so he will say to himsel", the clan is not to rise, but there is something.
then he will see my button, and that was duncan stewart's.
and then he will say to himsel", the son of duncan is in the heather, and has need of me."
""well," said i, "it may be.
but even supposing so, there is a good deal of heather between here and the forth."
""and that is a very true word," says alan.
""but then john breck will see the sprig of birch and the sprig of pine; and he will say to himsel" -lrb- if he is a man of any penetration at all, which i misdoubt -rrb-, alan will be lying in a wood which is both of pines and birches.
then he will think to himsel", that is not so very rife hereabout; and then he will come and give us a look up in corrynakiegh.
and if he does not, david, the devil may fly away with him, for what i care; for he will no be worth the salt to his porridge."
""eh, man," said i, drolling with him a little, "you're very ingenious!
but would it not be simpler for you to write him a few words in black and white?"
""and that is an excellent observe, mr. balfour of shaws," says alan, drolling with me; "and it would certainly be much simpler for me to write to him, but it would be a sore job for john breck to read it.
he would have to go to the school for two-three years; and it's possible we might be wearied waiting on him."
so that night alan carried down his fiery cross and set it in the bouman's window.
he was troubled when he came back; for the dogs had barked and the folk run out from their houses; and he thought he had heard a clatter of arms and seen a red-coat come to one of the doors.
on all accounts we lay the next day in the borders of the wood and kept a close look-out, so that if it was john breck that came we might be ready to guide him, and if it was the red-coats we should have time to get away.
about noon a man was to be spied, straggling up the open side of the mountain in the sun, and looking round him as he came, from under his hand.
no sooner had alan seen him than he whistled; the man turned and came a little towards us: then alan would give another "peep!"
and the man would come still nearer; and so by the sound of whistling, he was guided to the spot where we lay.
he was a ragged, wild, bearded man, about forty, grossly disfigured with the small pox, and looked both dull and savage.
although his english was very bad and broken, yet alan -lrb- according to his very handsome use, whenever i was by -rrb- would suffer him to speak no gaelic.
perhaps the strange language made him appear more backward than he really was; but i thought he had little good-will to serve us, and what he had was the child of terror.
alan would have had him carry a message to james; but the bouman would hear of no message.
""she was forget it," he said in his screaming voice; and would either have a letter or wash his hands of us.
i thought alan would be gravelled at that, for we lacked the means of writing in that desert.
but he was a man of more resources than i knew; searched the wood until he found the quill of a cushat-dove, which he shaped into a pen; made himself a kind of ink with gunpowder from his horn and water from the running stream; and tearing a corner from his french military commission -lrb- which he carried in his pocket, like a talisman to keep him from the gallows -rrb-, he sat down and wrote as follows: "dear kinsman, -- please send the money by the bearer to the place he kens of.
""your affectionate cousin, "a. s." this he intrusted to the bouman, who promised to make what manner of speed he best could, and carried it off with him down the hill.
he was three full days gone, but about five in the evening of the third, we heard a whistling in the wood, which alan answered; and presently the bouman came up the water-side, looking for us, right and left.
he seemed less sulky than before, and indeed he was no doubt well pleased to have got to the end of such a dangerous commission.
he gave us the news of the country; that it was alive with red-coats; that arms were being found, and poor folk brought in trouble daily; and that james and some of his servants were already clapped in prison at fort william, under strong suspicion of complicity.
it seemed it was noised on all sides that alan breck had fired the shot; and there was a bill issued for both him and me, with one hundred pounds reward.
this was all as bad as could be; and the little note the bouman had carried us from mrs. stewart was of a miserable sadness.
in it she besought alan not to let himself be captured, assuring him, if he fell in the hands of the troops, both he and james were no better than dead men.
the money she had sent was all that she could beg or borrow, and she prayed heaven we could be doing with it.
lastly, she said, she enclosed us one of the bills in which we were described.
this we looked upon with great curiosity and not a little fear, partly as a man may look in a mirror, partly as he might look into the barrel of an enemy's gun to judge if it be truly aimed.
alan was advertised as "a small, pock-marked, active man of thirty-five or thereby, dressed in a feathered hat, a french side-coat of blue with silver buttons, and lace a great deal tarnished, a red waistcoat and breeches of black, shag;" and i as "a tall strong lad of about eighteen, wearing an old blue coat, very ragged, an old highland bonnet, a long homespun waistcoat, blue breeches; his legs bare, low-country shoes, wanting the toes; speaks like a lowlander, and has no beard."
alan was well enough pleased to see his finery so fully remembered and set down; only when he came to the word tarnish, he looked upon his lace like one a little mortified.
as for myself, i thought i cut a miserable figure in the bill; and yet was well enough pleased too, for since i had changed these rags, the description had ceased to be a danger and become a source of safety.
""alan," said i, "you should change your clothes."
""na, troth!"
said alan, "i have nae others.
a fine sight i would be, if i went back to france in a bonnet!"
this put a second reflection in my mind: that if i were to separate from alan and his tell-tale clothes i should be safe against arrest, and might go openly about my business.
nor was this all; for suppose i was arrested when i was alone, there was little against me; but suppose i was taken in company with the reputed murderer, my case would begin to be grave.
for generosity's sake i dare not speak my mind upon this head; but i thought of it none the less.
i thought of it all the more, too, when the bouman brought out a green purse with four guineas in gold, and the best part of another in small change.
true, it was more than i had.
but then alan, with less than five guineas, had to get as far as france; i, with my less than two, not beyond queensferry; so that taking things in their proportion, alan's society was not only a peril to my life, but a burden on my purse.
but there was no thought of the sort in the honest head of my companion.
he believed he was serving, helping, and protecting me.
and what could i do but hold my peace, and chafe, and take my chance of it?
""it's little enough," said alan, putting the purse in his pocket, "but it'll do my business.
and now, john breck, if ye will hand me over my button, this gentleman and me will be for taking the road."
but the bouman, after feeling about in a hairy purse that hung in front of him in the highland manner -lrb- though he wore otherwise the lowland habit, with sea-trousers -rrb-, began to roll his eyes strangely, and at last said, "her nainsel will loss it," meaning he thought he had lost it.
""what!"
cried alan, "you will lose my button, that was my father's before me?
now i will tell you what is in my mind, john breck: it is in my mind this is the worst day's work that ever ye did since ye was born."
and as alan spoke, he set his hands on his knees and looked at the bouman with a smiling mouth, and that dancing light in his eyes that meant mischief to his enemies.
perhaps the bouman was honest enough; perhaps he had meant to cheat and then, finding himself alone with two of us in a desert place, cast back to honesty as being safer; at least, and all at once, he seemed to find that button and handed it to alan.
""well, and it is a good thing for the honour of the maccolls," said alan, and then to me, "here is my button back again, and i thank you for parting with it, which is of a piece with all your friendships to me."
then he took the warmest parting of the bouman.
""for," says he, "ye have done very well by me, and set your neck at a venture, and i will always give you the name of a good man."
lastly, the bouman took himself off by one way; and alan and i -lrb- getting our chattels together -rrb- struck into another to resume our flight.
chapter xxii the flight in the heather: the moor some seven hours" incessant, hard travelling brought us early in the morning to the end of a range of mountains.
in front of us there lay a piece of low, broken, desert land, which we must now cross.
the sun was not long up, and shone straight in our eyes; a little, thin mist went up from the face of the moorland like a smoke; so that -lrb- as alan said -rrb- there might have been twenty squadron of dragoons there and we none the wiser.
we sat down, therefore, in a howe of the hill-side till the mist should have risen, and made ourselves a dish of drammach, and held a council of war.
""david," said alan, "this is the kittle bit.
shall we lie here till it comes night, or shall we risk it, and stave on ahead?"
""well," said i, "i am tired indeed, but i could walk as far again, if that was all."
""ay, but it isnae," said alan, "nor yet the half.
this is how we stand: appin's fair death to us.
to the south it's all campbells, and no to be thought of.
to the north; well, there's no muckle to be gained by going north; neither for you, that wants to get to queensferry, nor yet for me, that wants to get to france.
well, then, we'll can strike east."
""east be it!"
says i, quite cheerily; but i was thinking in to myself: "o, man, if you would only take one point of the compass and let me take any other, it would be the best for both of us."
""well, then, east, ye see, we have the muirs," said alan.
""once there, david, it's mere pitch-and-toss.
out on yon bald, naked, flat place, where can a body turn to?
let the red-coats come over a hill, they can spy you miles away; and the sorrow's in their horses" heels, they would soon ride you down.
it's no good place, david; and i'm free to say, it's worse by daylight than by dark."
""alan," said i, "hear my way of it.
appin's death for us; we have none too much money, nor yet meal; the longer they seek, the nearer they may guess where we are; it's all a risk; and i give my word to go ahead until we drop."
alan was delighted.
""there are whiles," said he, "when ye are altogether too canny and whiggish to be company for a gentleman like me; but there come other whiles when ye show yoursel" a mettle spark; and it's then, david, that i love ye like a brother."
the mist rose and died away, and showed us that country lying as waste as the sea; only the moorfowl and the pewees crying upon it, and far over to the east, a herd of deer, moving like dots.
much of it was red with heather; much of the rest broken up with bogs and hags and peaty pools; some had been burnt black in a heath fire; and in another place there was quite a forest of dead firs, standing like skeletons.
a wearier-looking desert man never saw; but at least it was clear of troops, which was our point.
we went down accordingly into the waste, and began to make our toilsome and devious travel towards the eastern verge.
there were the tops of mountains all round -lrb- you are to remember -rrb- from whence we might be spied at any moment; so it behoved us to keep in the hollow parts of the moor, and when these turned aside from our direction to move upon its naked face with infinite care.
sometimes, for half an hour together, we must crawl from one heather bush to another, as hunters do when they are hard upon the deer.
it was a clear day again, with a blazing sun; the water in the brandy bottle was soon gone; and altogether, if i had guessed what it would be to crawl half the time upon my belly and to walk much of the rest stooping nearly to the knees, i should certainly have held back from such a killing enterprise.
toiling and resting and toiling again, we wore away the morning; and about noon lay down in a thick bush of heather to sleep.
alan took the first watch; and it seemed to me i had scarce closed my eyes before i was shaken up to take the second.
we had no clock to go by; and alan stuck a sprig of heath in the ground to serve instead; so that as soon as the shadow of the bush should fall so far to the east, i might know to rouse him.
but i was by this time so weary that i could have slept twelve hours at a stretch; i had the taste of sleep in my throat; my joints slept even when my mind was waking; the hot smell of the heather, and the drone of the wild bees, were like possets to me; and every now and again i would give a jump and find i had been dozing.
the last time i woke i seemed to come back from farther away, and thought the sun had taken a great start in the heavens.
i looked at the sprig of heath, and at that i could have cried aloud: for i saw i had betrayed my trust.
my head was nearly turned with fear and shame; and at what i saw, when i looked out around me on the moor, my heart was like dying in my body.
for sure enough, a body of horse-soldiers had come down during my sleep, and were drawing near to us from the south-east, spread out in the shape of a fan and riding their horses to and fro in the deep parts of the heather.
when i waked alan, he glanced first at the soldiers, then at the mark and the position of the sun, and knitted his brows with a sudden, quick look, both ugly and anxious, which was all the reproach i had of him.
""what are we to do now?"
i asked.
""we'll have to play at being hares," said he.
""do ye see yon mountain?"
pointing to one on the north-eastern sky.
""ay," said i. "well, then," says he, "let us strike for that.
its name is ben alder.
it is a wild, desert mountain full of hills and hollows, and if we can win to it before the morn, we may do yet."
""but, alan," cried i, "that will take us across the very coming of the soldiers!"
""i ken that fine," said he; "but if we are driven back on appin, we are two dead men.
so now, david man, be brisk!"
with that he began to run forward on his hands and knees with an incredible quickness, as though it were his natural way of going.
all the time, too, he kept winding in and out in the lower parts of the moorland where we were the best concealed.
some of these had been burned or at least scathed with fire; and there rose in our faces -lrb- which were close to the ground -rrb- a blinding, choking dust as fine as smoke.
the water was long out; and this posture of running on the hands and knees brings an overmastering weakness and weariness, so that the joints ache and the wrists faint under your weight.
now and then, indeed, where was a big bush of heather, we lay awhile, and panted, and putting aside the leaves, looked back at the dragoons.
they had not spied us, for they held straight on; a half-troop, i think, covering about two miles of ground, and beating it mighty thoroughly as they went.
i had awakened just in time; a little later, and we must have fled in front of them, instead of escaping on one side.
even as it was, the least misfortune might betray us; and now and again, when a grouse rose out of the heather with a clap of wings, we lay as still as the dead and were afraid to breathe.
the aching and faintness of my body, the labouring of my heart, the soreness of my hands, and the smarting of my throat and eyes in the continual smoke of dust and ashes, had soon grown to be so unbearable that i would gladly have given up.
nothing but the fear of alan lent me enough of a false kind of courage to continue.
as for himself -lrb- and you are to bear in mind that he was cumbered with a great-coat -rrb- he had first turned crimson, but as time went on the redness began to be mingled with patches of white; his breath cried and whistled as it came; and his voice, when he whispered his observations in my ear during our halts, sounded like nothing human.
yet he seemed in no way dashed in spirits, nor did he at all abate in his activity, so that i was driven to marvel at the man's endurance.
at length, in the first gloaming of the night, we heard a trumpet sound, and looking back from among the heather, saw the troop beginning to collect.
a little after, they had built a fire and camped for the night, about the middle of the waste.
at this i begged and besought that we might lie down and sleep.
""there shall be no sleep the night!"
said alan.
""from now on, these weary dragoons of yours will keep the crown of the muirland, and none will get out of appin but winged fowls.
we got through in the nick of time, and shall we jeopard what we've gained?
na, na, when the day comes, it shall find you and me in a fast place on ben alder."
""alan," i said, "it's not the want of will: it's the strength that i want.
if i could, i would; but as sure as i'm alive i can not."
""very well, then," said alan.
""i'll carry ye."
i looked to see if he were jesting; but no, the little man was in dead earnest; and the sight of so much resolution shamed me.
""lead away!"
said i. "i'll follow."
he gave me one look as much as to say, "well done, david!"
and off he set again at his top speed.
it grew cooler and even a little darker -lrb- but not much -rrb- with the coming of the night.
the sky was cloudless; it was still early in july, and pretty far north; in the darkest part of that night, you would have needed pretty good eyes to read, but for all that, i have often seen it darker in a winter mid-day.
heavy dew fell and drenched the moor like rain; and this refreshed me for a while.
when we stopped to breathe, and i had time to see all about me, the clearness and sweetness of the night, the shapes of the hills like things asleep, and the fire dwindling away behind us, like a bright spot in the midst of the moor, anger would come upon me in a clap that i must still drag myself in agony and eat the dust like a worm.
by what i have read in books, i think few that have held a pen were ever really wearied, or they would write of it more strongly.
i had no care of my life, neither past nor future, and i scarce remembered there was such a lad as david balfour.
i did not think of myself, but just of each fresh step which i was sure would be my last, with despair -- and of alan, who was the cause of it, with hatred.
alan was in the right trade as a soldier; this is the officer's part to make men continue to do things, they know not wherefore, and when, if the choice was offered, they would lie down where they were and be killed.
and i dare say i would have made a good enough private; for in these last hours it never occurred to me that i had any choice but just to obey as long as i was able, and die obeying.
day began to come in, after years, i thought; and by that time we were past the greatest danger, and could walk upon our feet like men, instead of crawling like brutes.
but, dear heart have mercy!
what a pair we must have made, going double like old grandfathers, stumbling like babes, and as white as dead folk.
never a word passed between us; each set his mouth and kept his eyes in front of him, and lifted up his foot and set it down again, like people lifting weights at a country play; * all the while, with the moorfowl crying "peep!"
in the heather, and the light coming slowly clearer in the east.
* village fair.
i say alan did as i did.
not that ever i looked at him, for i had enough ado to keep my feet; but because it is plain he must have been as stupid with weariness as myself, and looked as little where we were going, or we should not have walked into an ambush like blind men.
it fell in this way.
we were going down a heathery brae, alan leading and i following a pace or two behind, like a fiddler and his wife; when upon a sudden the heather gave a rustle, three or four ragged men leaped out, and the next moment we were lying on our backs, each with a dirk at his throat.
i do n't think i cared; the pain of this rough handling was quite swallowed up by the pains of which i was already full; and i was too glad to have stopped walking to mind about a dirk.
i lay looking up in the face of the man that held me; and i mind his face was black with the sun, and his eyes very light, but i was not afraid of him.
i heard alan and another whispering in the gaelic; and what they said was all one to me.
then the dirks were put up, our weapons were taken away, and we were set face to face, sitting in the heather.
""they are cluny's men," said alan.
""we couldnae have fallen better.
we're just to bide here with these, which are his out-sentries, till they can get word to the chief of my arrival."
now cluny macpherson, the chief of the clan vourich, had been one of the leaders of the great rebellion six years before; there was a price on his life; and i had supposed him long ago in france, with the rest of the heads of that desperate party.
even tired as i was, the surprise of what i heard half wakened me.
""what," i cried, "is cluny still here?"
""ay, is he so!"
said alan.
""still in his own country and kept by his own clan.
king george can do no more."
i think i would have asked farther, but alan gave me the put-off.
""i am rather wearied," he said, "and i would like fine to get a sleep."
and without more words, he rolled on his face in a deep heather bush, and seemed to sleep at once.
there was no such thing possible for me.
you have heard grasshoppers whirring in the grass in the summer time?
well, i had no sooner closed my eyes, than my body, and above all my head, belly, and wrists, seemed to be filled with whirring grasshoppers; and i must open my eyes again at once, and tumble and toss, and sit up and lie down; and look at the sky which dazzled me, or at cluny's wild and dirty sentries, peering out over the top of the brae and chattering to each other in the gaelic.
that was all the rest i had, until the messenger returned; when, as it appeared that cluny would be glad to receive us, we must get once more upon our feet and set forward.
alan was in excellent good spirits, much refreshed by his sleep, very hungry, and looking pleasantly forward to a dram and a dish of hot collops, of which, it seems, the messenger had brought him word.
for my part, it made me sick to hear of eating.
i had been dead-heavy before, and now i felt a kind of dreadful lightness, which would not suffer me to walk.
i drifted like a gossamer; the ground seemed to me a cloud, the hills a feather-weight, the air to have a current, like a running burn, which carried me to and fro.
with all that, a sort of horror of despair sat on my mind, so that i could have wept at my own helplessness.
i saw alan knitting his brows at me, and supposed it was in anger; and that gave me a pang of light-headed fear, like what a child may have.
i remember, too, that i was smiling, and could not stop smiling, hard as i tried; for i thought it was out of place at such a time.
but my good companion had nothing in his mind but kindness; and the next moment, two of the gillies had me by the arms, and i began to be carried forward with great swiftness -lrb- or so it appeared to me, although i dare say it was slowly enough in truth -rrb-, through a labyrinth of dreary glens and hollows and into the heart of that dismal mountain of ben alder.
chapter xxiii cluny's cage we came at last to the foot of an exceeding steep wood, which scrambled up a craggy hillside, and was crowned by a naked precipice.
""it's here," said one of the guides, and we struck up hill.
the trees clung upon the slope, like sailors on the shrouds of a ship, and their trunks were like the rounds of a ladder, by which we mounted.
quite at the top, and just before the rocky face of the cliff sprang above the foliage, we found that strange house which was known in the country as "cluny's cage."
the trunks of several trees had been wattled across, the intervals strengthened with stakes, and the ground behind this barricade levelled up with earth to make the floor.
a tree, which grew out from the hillside, was the living centre-beam of the roof.
the walls were of wattle and covered with moss.
the whole house had something of an egg shape; and it half hung, half stood in that steep, hillside thicket, like a wasp's nest in a green hawthorn.
within, it was large enough to shelter five or six persons with some comfort.
a projection of the cliff had been cunningly employed to be the fireplace; and the smoke rising against the face of the rock, and being not dissimilar in colour, readily escaped notice from below.
this was but one of cluny's hiding-places; he had caves, besides, and underground chambers in several parts of his country; and following the reports of his scouts, he moved from one to another as the soldiers drew near or moved away.
by this manner of living, and thanks to the affection of his clan, he had not only stayed all this time in safety, while so many others had fled or been taken and slain: but stayed four or five years longer, and only went to france at last by the express command of his master.
there he soon died; and it is strange to reflect that he may have regretted his cage upon ben alder.
when we came to the door he was seated by his rock chimney, watching a gillie about some cookery.
he was mighty plainly habited, with a knitted nightcap drawn over his ears, and smoked a foul cutty pipe.
for all that he had the manners of a king, and it was quite a sight to see him rise out of his place to welcome us.
""well, mr. stewart, come awa", sir!"
said he, "and bring in your friend that as yet i dinna ken the name of."
""and how is yourself, cluny?"
said alan.
""i hope ye do brawly, sir.
and i am proud to see ye, and to present to ye my friend the laird of shaws, mr. david balfour."
alan never referred to my estate without a touch of a sneer, when we were alone; but with strangers, he rang the words out like a herald.
""step in by, the both of ye, gentlemen," says cluny.
""i make ye welcome to my house, which is a queer, rude place for certain, but one where i have entertained a royal personage, mr. stewart -- ye doubtless ken the personage i have in my eye.
we'll take a dram for luck, and as soon as this handless man of mine has the collops ready, we'll dine and take a hand at the cartes as gentlemen should.
my life is a bit driegh," says he, pouring out the brandy; "i see little company, and sit and twirl my thumbs, and mind upon a great day that is gone by, and weary for another great day that we all hope will be upon the road.
and so here's a toast to ye: the restoration!"
thereupon we all touched glasses and drank.
i am sure i wished no ill to king george; and if he had been there himself in proper person, it's like he would have done as i did.
no sooner had i taken out the drain than i felt hugely better, and could look on and listen, still a little mistily perhaps, but no longer with the same groundless horror and distress of mind.
it was certainly a strange place, and we had a strange host.
in his long hiding, cluny had grown to have all manner of precise habits, like those of an old maid.
he had a particular place, where no one else must sit; the cage was arranged in a particular way, which none must disturb; cookery was one of his chief fancies, and even while he was greeting us in, he kept an eye to the collops.
it appears, he sometimes visited or received visits from his wife and one or two of his nearest friends, under the cover of night; but for the more part lived quite alone, and communicated only with his sentinels and the gillies that waited on him in the cage.
the first thing in the morning, one of them, who was a barber, came and shaved him, and gave him the news of the country, of which he was immoderately greedy.
there was no end to his questions; he put them as earnestly as a child; and at some of the answers, laughed out of all bounds of reason, and would break out again laughing at the mere memory, hours after the barber was gone.
to be sure, there might have been a purpose in his questions; for though he was thus sequestered, and like the other landed gentlemen of scotland, stripped by the late act of parliament of legal powers, he still exercised a patriarchal justice in his clan.
disputes were brought to him in his hiding-hole to be decided; and the men of his country, who would have snapped their fingers at the court of session, laid aside revenge and paid down money at the bare word of this forfeited and hunted outlaw.
when he was angered, which was often enough, he gave his commands and breathed threats of punishment like any king; and his gillies trembled and crouched away from him like children before a hasty father.
with each of them, as he entered, he ceremoniously shook hands, both parties touching their bonnets at the same time in a military manner.
altogether, i had a fair chance to see some of the inner workings of a highland clan; and this with a proscribed, fugitive chief; his country conquered; the troops riding upon all sides in quest of him, sometimes within a mile of where he lay; and when the least of the ragged fellows whom he rated and threatened, could have made a fortune by betraying him.
on that first day, as soon as the collops were ready, cluny gave them with his own hand a squeeze of a lemon -lrb- for he was well supplied with luxuries -rrb- and bade us draw in to our meal.
""they," said he, meaning the collops, "are such as i gave his royal highness in this very house; bating the lemon juice, for at that time we were glad to get the meat and never fashed for kitchen.
* indeed, there were mair dragoons than lemons in my country in the year forty-six."
* condiment.
i do not know if the collops were truly very good, but my heart rose against the sight of them, and i could eat but little.
all the while cluny entertained us with stories of prince charlie's stay in the cage, giving us the very words of the speakers, and rising from his place to show us where they stood.
by these, i gathered the prince was a gracious, spirited boy, like the son of a race of polite kings, but not so wise as solomon.
i gathered, too, that while he was in the cage, he was often drunk; so the fault that has since, by all accounts, made such a wreck of him, had even then begun to show itself.
we were no sooner done eating than cluny brought out an old, thumbed, greasy pack of cards, such as you may find in a mean inn; and his eyes brightened in his face as he proposed that we should fall to playing.
now this was one of the things i had been brought up to eschew like disgrace; it being held by my father neither the part of a christian nor yet of a gentleman to set his own livelihood and fish for that of others, on the cast of painted pasteboard.
to be sure, i might have pleaded my fatigue, which was excuse enough; but i thought it behoved that i should bear a testimony.
i must have got very red in the face, but i spoke steadily, and told them i had no call to be a judge of others, but for my own part, it was a matter in which i had no clearness.
cluny stopped mingling the cards.
""what in deil's name is this?"
says he.
""what kind of whiggish, canting talk is this, for the house of cluny macpherson?"
""i will put my hand in the fire for mr. balfour," says alan.
""he is an honest and a mettle gentleman, and i would have ye bear in mind who says it.
i bear a king's name," says he, cocking his hat; "and i and any that i call friend are company for the best.
but the gentleman is tired, and should sleep; if he has no mind to the cartes, it will never hinder you and me.
and i'm fit and willing, sir, to play ye any game that ye can name."
""sir," says cluny, "in this poor house of mine i would have you to ken that any gentleman may follow his pleasure.
if your friend would like to stand on his head, he is welcome.
and if either he, or you, or any other man, is not preceesely satisfied, i will be proud to step outside with him."
i had no will that these two friends should cut their throats for my sake.
""sir," said i, "i am very wearied, as alan says; and what's more, as you are a man that likely has sons of your own, i may tell you it was a promise to my father."
""say nae mair, say nae mair," said cluny, and pointed me to a bed of heather in a corner of the cage.
for all that he was displeased enough, looked at me askance, and grumbled when he looked.
and indeed it must be owned that both my scruples and the words in which i declared them, smacked somewhat of the covenanter, and were little in their place among wild highland jacobites.
what with the brandy and the venison, a strange heaviness had come over me; and i had scarce lain down upon the bed before i fell into a kind of trance, in which i continued almost the whole time of our stay in the cage.
sometimes i was broad awake and understood what passed; sometimes i only heard voices, or men snoring, like the voice of a silly river; and the plaids upon the wall dwindled down and swelled out again, like firelight shadows on the roof.
i must sometimes have spoken or cried out, for i remember i was now and then amazed at being answered; yet i was conscious of no particular nightmare, only of a general, black, abiding horror -- a horror of the place i was in, and the bed i lay in, and the plaids on the wall, and the voices, and the fire, and myself.
the barber-gillie, who was a doctor too, was called in to prescribe for me; but as he spoke in the gaelic, i understood not a word of his opinion, and was too sick even to ask for a translation.
i knew well enough i was ill, and that was all i cared about.
i paid little heed while i lay in this poor pass.
but alan and cluny were most of the time at the cards, and i am clear that alan must have begun by winning; for i remember sitting up, and seeing them hard at it, and a great glittering pile of as much as sixty or a hundred guineas on the table.
it looked strange enough, to see all this wealth in a nest upon a cliff-side, wattled about growing trees.
and even then, i thought it seemed deep water for alan to be riding, who had no better battle-horse than a green purse and a matter of five pounds.
the luck, it seems, changed on the second day.
about noon i was wakened as usual for dinner, and as usual refused to eat, and was given a dram with some bitter infusion which the barber had prescribed.
the sun was shining in at the open door of the cage, and this dazzled and offended me.
cluny sat at the table, biting the pack of cards.
alan had stooped over the bed, and had his face close to my eyes; to which, troubled as they were with the fever, it seemed of the most shocking bigness.
he asked me for a loan of my money.
""what for?"
said i. "o, just for a loan," said he.
""but why?"
i repeated.
""i do n't see."
""hut, david!"
said alan, "ye wouldnae grudge me a loan?"
i would, though, if i had had my senses!
but all i thought of then was to get his face away, and i handed him my money.
on the morning of the third day, when we had been forty-eight hours in the cage, i awoke with a great relief of spirits, very weak and weary indeed, but seeing things of the right size and with their honest, everyday appearance.
i had a mind to eat, moreover, rose from bed of my own movement, and as soon as we had breakfasted, stepped to the entry of the cage and sat down outside in the top of the wood.
it was a grey day with a cool, mild air: and i sat in a dream all morning, only disturbed by the passing by of cluny's scouts and servants coming with provisions and reports; for as the coast was at that time clear, you might almost say he held court openly.
when i returned, he and alan had laid the cards aside, and were questioning a gillie; and the chief turned about and spoke to me in the gaelic.
""i have no gaelic, sir," said i.
now since the card question, everything i said or did had the power of annoying cluny.
""your name has more sense than yourself, then," said he angrily, "for it's good gaelic.
but the point is this.
my scout reports all clear in the south, and the question is, have ye the strength to go?"
i saw cards on the table, but no gold; only a heap of little written papers, and these all on cluny's side.
alan, besides, had an odd look, like a man not very well content; and i began to have a strong misgiving.
""i do not know if i am as well as i should be," said i, looking at alan; "but the little money we have has a long way to carry us."
alan took his under-lip into his mouth, and looked upon the ground.
""david," says he at last, "i've lost it; there's the naked truth."
""my money too?"
said i. "your money too," says alan, with a groan.
""ye shouldnae have given it me.
i'm daft when i get to the cartes."
""hoot-toot!
hoot-toot!"
said cluny.
""it was all daffing; it's all nonsense.
of course you'll have your money back again, and the double of it, if ye'll make so free with me.
it would be a singular thing for me to keep it.
it's not to be supposed that i would be any hindrance to gentlemen in your situation; that would be a singular thing!"
cries he, and began to pull gold out of his pocket with a mighty red face.
alan said nothing, only looked on the ground.
""will you step to the door with me, sir?"
said i. cluny said he would be very glad, and followed me readily enough, but he looked flustered and put out.
""and now, sir," says i, "i must first acknowledge your generosity."
""nonsensical nonsense!"
cries cluny.
""where's the generosity?
this is just a most unfortunate affair; but what would ye have me do -- boxed up in this bee-skep of a cage of mine -- but just set my friends to the cartes, when i can get them?
and if they lose, of course, it's not to be supposed --" and here he came to a pause.
""yes," said i, "if they lose, you give them back their money; and if they win, they carry away yours in their pouches!
i have said before that i grant your generosity; but to me, sir, it's a very painful thing to be placed in this position."
there was a little silence, in which cluny seemed always as if he was about to speak, but said nothing.
all the time he grew redder and redder in the face.
""i am a young man," said i, "and i ask your advice.
advise me as you would your son.
my friend fairly lost his money, after having fairly gained a far greater sum of yours; can i accept it back again?
would that be the right part for me to play?
whatever i do, you can see for yourself it must be hard upon a man of any pride."
""it's rather hard on me, too, mr. balfour," said cluny, "and ye give me very much the look of a man that has entrapped poor people to their hurt.
i wouldnae have my friends come to any house of mine to accept affronts; no," he cried, with a sudden heat of anger, "nor yet to give them!"
""and so you see, sir," said i, "there is something to be said upon my side; and this gambling is a very poor employ for gentlefolks.
but i am still waiting your opinion."
i am sure if ever cluny hated any man it was david balfour.
he looked me all over with a warlike eye, and i saw the challenge at his lips.
but either my youth disarmed him, or perhaps his own sense of justice.
certainly it was a mortifying matter for all concerned, and not least cluny; the more credit that he took it as he did.
""mr. balfour," said he, "i think you are too nice and covenanting, but for all that you have the spirit of a very pretty gentleman.
upon my honest word, ye may take this money -- it's what i would tell my son -- and here's my hand along with it!"
chapter xxiv the flight in the heather: the quarrel alan and i were put across loch errocht under cloud of night, and went down its eastern shore to another hiding-place near the head of loch rannoch, whither we were led by one of the gillies from the cage.
this fellow carried all our luggage and alan's great-coat in the bargain, trotting along under the burthen, far less than the half of which used to weigh me to the ground, like a stout hill pony with a feather; yet he was a man that, in plain contest, i could have broken on my knee.
doubtless it was a great relief to walk disencumbered; and perhaps without that relief, and the consequent sense of liberty and lightness, i could not have walked at all.
i was but new risen from a bed of sickness; and there was nothing in the state of our affairs to hearten me for much exertion; travelling, as we did, over the most dismal deserts in scotland, under a cloudy heaven, and with divided hearts among the travellers.
for long, we said nothing; marching alongside or one behind the other, each with a set countenance: i, angry and proud, and drawing what strength i had from these two violent and sinful feelings; alan angry and ashamed, ashamed that he had lost my money, angry that i should take it so ill.
the thought of a separation ran always the stronger in my mind; and the more i approved of it, the more ashamed i grew of my approval.
it would be a fine, handsome, generous thing, indeed, for alan to turn round and say to me: "go, i am in the most danger, and my company only increases yours."
but for me to turn to the friend who certainly loved me, and say to him: "you are in great danger, i am in but little; your friendship is a burden; go, take your risks and bear your hardships alone --" no, that was impossible; and even to think of it privily to myself, made my cheeks to burn.
and yet alan had behaved like a child, and -lrb- what is worse -rrb- a treacherous child.
wheedling my money from me while i lay half-conscious was scarce better than theft; and yet here he was trudging by my side, without a penny to his name, and by what i could see, quite blithe to sponge upon the money he had driven me to beg.
true, i was ready to share it with him; but it made me rage to see him count upon my readiness.
these were the two things uppermost in my mind; and i could open my mouth upon neither without black ungenerosity.
so i did the next worst, and said nothing, nor so much as looked once at my companion, save with the tail of my eye.
at last, upon the other side of loch errocht, going over a smooth, rushy place, where the walking was easy, he could bear it no longer, and came close to me.
""david," says he, "this is no way for two friends to take a small accident.
i have to say that i'm sorry; and so that's said.
and now if you have anything, ye'd better say it."
""o," says i, "i have nothing."
he seemed disconcerted; at which i was meanly pleased.
""no," said he, with rather a trembling voice, "but when i say i was to blame?"
""why, of course, ye were to blame," said i, coolly; "and you will bear me out that i have never reproached you."
""never," says he; "but ye ken very well that ye've done worse.
are we to part?
ye said so once before.
are ye to say it again?
there's hills and heather enough between here and the two seas, david; and i will own i'm no very keen to stay where i'm no wanted."
this pierced me like a sword, and seemed to lay bare my private disloyalty.
""alan breck!"
i cried; and then: "do you think i am one to turn my back on you in your chief need?
you durs n't say it to my face.
my whole conduct's there to give the lie to it.
it's true, i fell asleep upon the muir; but that was from weariness, and you do wrong to cast it up to me --" "which is what i never did," said alan.
""but aside from that," i continued, "what have i done that you should even me to dogs by such a supposition?
i never yet failed a friend, and it's not likely i'll begin with you.
there are things between us that i can never forget, even if you can."
""i will only say this to ye, david," said alan, very quietly, "that i have long been owing ye my life, and now i owe ye money.
ye should try to make that burden light for me."
this ought to have touched me, and in a manner it did, but the wrong manner.
i felt i was behaving badly; and was now not only angry with alan, but angry with myself in the bargain; and it made me the more cruel.
""you asked me to speak," said i. "well, then, i will.
you own yourself that you have done me a disservice; i have had to swallow an affront: i have never reproached you, i never named the thing till you did.
and now you blame me," cried i, "because i cannae laugh and sing as if i was glad to be affronted.
the next thing will be that i'm to go down upon my knees and thank you for it!
ye should think more of others, alan breck.
if ye thought more of others, ye would perhaps speak less about yourself; and when a friend that likes you very well has passed over an offence without a word, you would be blithe to let it lie, instead of making it a stick to break his back with.
by your own way of it, it was you that was to blame; then it shouldnae be you to seek the quarrel."
""aweel," said alan, "say nae mair."
and we fell back into our former silence; and came to our journey's end, and supped, and lay down to sleep, without another word.
the gillie put us across loch rannoch in the dusk of the next day, and gave us his opinion as to our best route.
this was to get us up at once into the tops of the mountains: to go round by a circuit, turning the heads of glen lyon, glen lochay, and glen dochart, and come down upon the lowlands by kippen and the upper waters of the forth.
alan was little pleased with a route which led us through the country of his blood-foes, the glenorchy campbells.
he objected that by turning to the east, we should come almost at once among the athole stewarts, a race of his own name and lineage, although following a different chief, and come besides by a far easier and swifter way to the place whither we were bound.
but the gillie, who was indeed the chief man of cluny's scouts, had good reasons to give him on all hands, naming the force of troops in every district, and alleging finally -lrb- as well as i could understand -rrb- that we should nowhere be so little troubled as in a country of the campbells.
alan gave way at last, but with only half a heart.
""it's one of the dowiest countries in scotland," said he.
""there's naething there that i ken, but heath, and crows, and campbells.
but i see that ye're a man of some penetration; and be it as ye please!"
we set forth accordingly by this itinerary; and for the best part of three nights travelled on eerie mountains and among the well-heads of wild rivers; often buried in mist, almost continually blown and rained upon, and not once cheered by any glimpse of sunshine.
by day, we lay and slept in the drenching heather; by night, incessantly clambered upon break-neck hills and among rude crags.
we often wandered; we were often so involved in fog, that we must lie quiet till it lightened.
a fire was never to be thought of.
our only food was drammach and a portion of cold meat that we had carried from the cage; and as for drink, heaven knows we had no want of water.
this was a dreadful time, rendered the more dreadful by the gloom of the weather and the country.
i was never warm; my teeth chattered in my head; i was troubled with a very sore throat, such as i had on the isle; i had a painful stitch in my side, which never left me; and when i slept in my wet bed, with the rain beating above and the mud oozing below me, it was to live over again in fancy the worst part of my adventures -- to see the tower of shaws lit by lightning, ransome carried below on the men's backs, shuan dying on the round-house floor, or colin campbell grasping at the bosom of his coat.
from such broken slumbers, i would be aroused in the gloaming, to sit up in the same puddle where i had slept, and sup cold drammach; the rain driving sharp in my face or running down my back in icy trickles; the mist enfolding us like as in a gloomy chamber -- or, perhaps, if the wind blew, falling suddenly apart and showing us the gulf of some dark valley where the streams were crying aloud.
the sound of an infinite number of rivers came up from all round.
in this steady rain the springs of the mountain were broken up; every glen gushed water like a cistern; every stream was in high spate, and had filled and overflowed its channel.
during our night tramps, it was solemn to hear the voice of them below in the valleys, now booming like thunder, now with an angry cry.
i could well understand the story of the water kelpie, that demon of the streams, who is fabled to keep wailing and roaring at the ford until the coming of the doomed traveller.
alan i saw believed it, or half believed it; and when the cry of the river rose more than usually sharp, i was little surprised -lrb- though, of course, i would still be shocked -rrb- to see him cross himself in the manner of the catholics.
during all these horrid wanderings we had no familiarity, scarcely even that of speech.
the truth is that i was sickening for my grave, which is my best excuse.
but besides that i was of an unforgiving disposition from my birth, slow to take offence, slower to forget it, and now incensed both against my companion and myself.
for the best part of two days he was unweariedly kind; silent, indeed, but always ready to help, and always hoping -lrb- as i could very well see -rrb- that my displeasure would blow by.
for the same length of time i stayed in myself, nursing my anger, roughly refusing his services, and passing him over with my eyes as if he had been a bush or a stone.
the second night, or rather the peep of the third day, found us upon a very open hill, so that we could not follow our usual plan and lie down immediately to eat and sleep.
before we had reached a place of shelter, the grey had come pretty clear, for though it still rained, the clouds ran higher; and alan, looking in my face, showed some marks of concern.
""ye had better let me take your pack," said he, for perhaps the ninth time since we had parted from the scout beside loch rannoch.
""i do very well, i thank you," said i, as cold as ice.
alan flushed darkly.
""i'll not offer it again," he said.
""i'm not a patient man, david."
""i never said you were," said i, which was exactly the rude, silly speech of a boy of ten.
alan made no answer at the time, but his conduct answered for him.
henceforth, it is to be thought, he quite forgave himself for the affair at cluny's; cocked his hat again, walked jauntily, whistled airs, and looked at me upon one side with a provoking smile.
the third night we were to pass through the western end of the country of balquhidder.
it came clear and cold, with a touch in the air like frost, and a northerly wind that blew the clouds away and made the stars bright.
the streams were full, of course, and still made a great noise among the hills; but i observed that alan thought no more upon the kelpie, and was in high good spirits.
as for me, the change of weather came too late; i had lain in the mire so long that -lrb- as the bible has it -rrb- my very clothes "abhorred me."
i was dead weary, deadly sick and full of pains and shiverings; the chill of the wind went through me, and the sound of it confused my ears.
in this poor state i had to bear from my companion something in the nature of a persecution.
he spoke a good deal, and never without a taunt.
""whig" was the best name he had to give me.
""here," he would say, "here's a dub for ye to jump, my whiggie!
i ken you're a fine jumper!"
and so on; all the time with a gibing voice and face.
i knew it was my own doing, and no one else's; but i was too miserable to repent.
i felt i could drag myself but little farther; pretty soon, i must lie down and die on these wet mountains like a sheep or a fox, and my bones must whiten there like the bones of a beast.
my head was light perhaps; but i began to love the prospect, i began to glory in the thought of such a death, alone in the desert, with the wild eagles besieging my last moments.
alan would repent then, i thought; he would remember, when i was dead, how much he owed me, and the remembrance would be torture.
so i went like a sick, silly, and bad-hearted schoolboy, feeding my anger against a fellow-man, when i would have been better on my knees, crying on god for mercy.
and at each of alan's taunts, i hugged myself.
""ah!"
thinks i to myself, "i have a better taunt in readiness; when i lie down and die, you will feel it like a buffet in your face; ah, what a revenge!
ah, how you will regret your ingratitude and cruelty!"
all the while, i was growing worse and worse.
once i had fallen, my leg simply doubling under me, and this had struck alan for the moment; but i was afoot so briskly, and set off again with such a natural manner, that he soon forgot the incident.
flushes of heat went over me, and then spasms of shuddering.
the stitch in my side was hardly bearable.
at last i began to feel that i could trail myself no farther: and with that, there came on me all at once the wish to have it out with alan, let my anger blaze, and be done with my life in a more sudden manner.
he had just called me "whig."
i stopped.
""mr. stewart," said i, in a voice that quivered like a fiddle-string, "you are older than i am, and should know your manners.
do you think it either very wise or very witty to cast my politics in my teeth?
i thought, where folk differed, it was the part of gentlemen to differ civilly; and if i did not, i may tell you i could find a better taunt than some of yours."
alan had stopped opposite to me, his hat cocked, his hands in his breeches pockets, his head a little on one side.
he listened, smiling evilly, as i could see by the starlight; and when i had done he began to whistle a jacobite air.
it was the air made in mockery of general cope's defeat at preston pans: "hey, johnnie cope, are ye waukin" yet?
and are your drums a-beatin" yet?"
and it came in my mind that alan, on the day of that battle, had been engaged upon the royal side.
""why do ye take that air, mr. stewart?"
said i. "is that to remind me you have been beaten on both sides?"
the air stopped on alan's lips.
""david!"
said he.
""but it's time these manners ceased," i continued; "and i mean you shall henceforth speak civilly of my king and my good friends the campbells."
""i am a stewart --" began alan.
""o!"
says i, "i ken ye bear a king's name.
but you are to remember, since i have been in the highlands, i have seen a good many of those that bear it; and the best i can say of them is this, that they would be none the worse of washing."
""do you know that you insult me?"
said alan, very low.
""i am sorry for that," said i, "for i am not done; and if you distaste the sermon, i doubt the pirliecue * will please you as little.
you have been chased in the field by the grown men of my party; it seems a poor kind of pleasure to out-face a boy.
both the campbells and the whigs have beaten you; you have run before them like a hare.
it behoves you to speak of them as of your betters."
* a second sermon.
alan stood quite still, the tails of his great-coat clapping behind him in the wind.
""this is a pity," he said at last.
""there are things said that can not be passed over."
""i never asked you to," said i. "i am as ready as yourself."
""ready?"
said he.
""ready," i repeated.
""i am no blower and boaster like some that i could name.
come on!"
and drawing my sword, i fell on guard as alan himself had taught me.
""david!"
he cried.
""are ye daft?
i cannae draw upon ye, david.
it's fair murder."
""that was your look-out when you insulted me," said i. "it's the truth!"
cried alan, and he stood for a moment, wringing his mouth in his hand like a man in sore perplexity.
""it's the bare truth," he said, and drew his sword.
but before i could touch his blade with mine, he had thrown it from him and fallen to the ground.
""na, na," he kept saying, "na, na -- i cannae, i cannae."
at this the last of my anger oozed all out of me; and i found myself only sick, and sorry, and blank, and wondering at myself.
i would have given the world to take back what i had said; but a word once spoken, who can recapture it?
i minded me of all alan's kindness and courage in the past, how he had helped and cheered and borne with me in our evil days; and then recalled my own insults, and saw that i had lost for ever that doughty friend.
at the same time, the sickness that hung upon me seemed to redouble, and the pang in my side was like a sword for sharpness.
i thought i must have swooned where i stood.
this it was that gave me a thought.
no apology could blot out what i had said; it was needless to think of one, none could cover the offence; but where an apology was vain, a mere cry for help might bring alan back to my side.
i put my pride away from me.
""alan!"
i said; "if ye cannae help me, i must just die here."
he started up sitting, and looked at me.
""it's true," said i. "i'm by with it.
o, let me get into the bield of a house -- i'll can die there easier."
i had no need to pretend; whether i chose or not, i spoke in a weeping voice that would have melted a heart of stone.
""can ye walk?"
asked alan.
""no," said i, "not without help.
this last hour my legs have been fainting under me; i've a stitch in my side like a red-hot iron; i cannae breathe right.
if i die, ye'll can forgive me, alan?
in my heart, i liked ye fine -- even when i was the angriest."
""wheesht, wheesht!"
cried alan.
""dinna say that!
david man, ye ken --" he shut his mouth upon a sob.
""let me get my arm about ye," he continued; "that's the way!
now lean upon me hard.
gude kens where there's a house!
we're in balwhidder, too; there should be no want of houses, no, nor friends" houses here.
do ye gang easier so, davie?"
""ay," said i, "i can be doing this way;" and i pressed his arm with my hand.
again he came near sobbing.
""davie," said he, "i'm no a right man at all; i have neither sense nor kindness; i could nae remember ye were just a bairn, i couldnae see ye were dying on your feet; davie, ye'll have to try and forgive me."
""o man, let's say no more about it!"
said i. "we're neither one of us to mend the other -- that's the truth!
we must just bear and forbear, man alan.
o, but my stitch is sore!
is there nae house?"
""i'll find a house to ye, david," he said, stoutly.
""we'll follow down the burn, where there's bound to be houses.
my poor man, will ye no be better on my back?"
""o, alan," says i, "and me a good twelve inches taller?"
""ye're no such a thing," cried alan, with a start.
""there may be a trifling matter of an inch or two; i'm no saying i'm just exactly what ye would call a tall man, whatever; and i dare say," he added, his voice tailing off in a laughable manner, "now when i come to think of it, i dare say ye'll be just about right.
ay, it'll be a foot, or near hand; or may be even mair!"
it was sweet and laughable to hear alan eat his words up in the fear of some fresh quarrel.
i could have laughed, had not my stitch caught me so hard; but if i had laughed, i think i must have wept too.
""alan," cried i, "what makes ye so good to me?
what makes ye care for such a thankless fellow?""
"deed, and i do n't know" said alan.
""for just precisely what i thought i liked about ye, was that ye never quarrelled: -- and now i like ye better!"
chapter xxv in balquhidder at the door of the first house we came to, alan knocked, which was of no very safe enterprise in such a part of the highlands as the braes of balquhidder.
no great clan held rule there; it was filled and disputed by small septs, and broken remnants, and what they call "chiefless folk," driven into the wild country about the springs of forth and teith by the advance of the campbells.
here were stewarts and maclarens, which came to the same thing, for the maclarens followed alan's chief in war, and made but one clan with appin.
here, too, were many of that old, proscribed, nameless, red-handed clan of the macgregors.
they had always been ill-considered, and now worse than ever, having credit with no side or party in the whole country of scotland.
their chief, macgregor of macgregor, was in exile; the more immediate leader of that part of them about balquhidder, james more, rob roy's eldest son, lay waiting his trial in edinburgh castle; they were in ill-blood with highlander and lowlander, with the grahames, the maclarens, and the stewarts; and alan, who took up the quarrel of any friend, however distant, was extremely wishful to avoid them.
chance served us very well; for it was a household of maclarens that we found, where alan was not only welcome for his name's sake but known by reputation.
here then i was got to bed without delay, and a doctor fetched, who found me in a sorry plight.
but whether because he was a very good doctor, or i a very young, strong man, i lay bedridden for no more than a week, and before a month i was able to take the road again with a good heart.
all this time alan would not leave me though i often pressed him, and indeed his foolhardiness in staying was a common subject of outcry with the two or three friends that were let into the secret.
he hid by day in a hole of the braes under a little wood; and at night, when the coast was clear, would come into the house to visit me.
i need not say if i was pleased to see him; mrs. maclaren, our hostess, thought nothing good enough for such a guest; and as duncan dhu -lrb- which was the name of our host -rrb- had a pair of pipes in his house, and was much of a lover of music, this time of my recovery was quite a festival, and we commonly turned night into day.
the soldiers let us be; although once a party of two companies and some dragoons went by in the bottom of the valley, where i could see them through the window as i lay in bed.
what was much more astonishing, no magistrate came near me, and there was no question put of whence i came or whither i was going; and in that time of excitement, i was as free of all inquiry as though i had lain in a desert.
yet my presence was known before i left to all the people in balquhidder and the adjacent parts; many coming about the house on visits and these -lrb- after the custom of the country -rrb- spreading the news among their neighbours.
the bills, too, had now been printed.
there was one pinned near the foot of my bed, where i could read my own not very flattering portrait and, in larger characters, the amount of the blood money that had been set upon my life.
duncan dhu and the rest that knew that i had come there in alan's company, could have entertained no doubt of who i was; and many others must have had their guess.
for though i had changed my clothes, i could not change my age or person; and lowland boys of eighteen were not so rife in these parts of the world, and above all about that time, that they could fail to put one thing with another, and connect me with the bill.
so it was, at least.
other folk keep a secret among two or three near friends, and somehow it leaks out; but among these clansmen, it is told to a whole countryside, and they will keep it for a century.
there was but one thing happened worth narrating; and that is the visit i had of robin oig, one of the sons of the notorious rob roy.
he was sought upon all sides on a charge of carrying a young woman from balfron and marrying her -lrb- as was alleged -rrb- by force; yet he stepped about balquhidder like a gentleman in his own walled policy.
it was he who had shot james maclaren at the plough stilts, a quarrel never satisfied; yet he walked into the house of his blood enemies as a rider * might into a public inn.
* commercial traveller.
duncan had time to pass me word of who it was; and we looked at one another in concern.
you should understand, it was then close upon the time of alan's coming; the two were little likely to agree; and yet if we sent word or sought to make a signal, it was sure to arouse suspicion in a man under so dark a cloud as the macgregor.
he came in with a great show of civility, but like a man among inferiors; took off his bonnet to mrs. maclaren, but clapped it on his head again to speak to duncan; and having thus set himself -lrb- as he would have thought -rrb- in a proper light, came to my bedside and bowed.
""i am given to know, sir," says he, "that your name is balfour."
""they call me david balfour," said i, "at your service."
""i would give ye my name in return, sir," he replied, "but it's one somewhat blown upon of late days; and it'll perhaps suffice if i tell ye that i am own brother to james more drummond or macgregor, of whom ye will scarce have failed to hear."
""no, sir," said i, a little alarmed; "nor yet of your father, macgregor-campbell."
and i sat up and bowed in bed; for i thought best to compliment him, in case he was proud of having had an outlaw to his father.
he bowed in return.
""but what i am come to say, sir," he went on, "is this.
in the year" 45, my brother raised a part of the "gregara" and marched six companies to strike a stroke for the good side; and the surgeon that marched with our clan and cured my brother's leg when it was broken in the brush at preston pans, was a gentleman of the same name precisely as yourself.
he was brother to balfour of baith; and if you are in any reasonable degree of nearness one of that gentleman's kin, i have come to put myself and my people at your command."
you are to remember that i knew no more of my descent than any cadger's dog; my uncle, to be sure, had prated of some of our high connections, but nothing to the present purpose; and there was nothing left me but that bitter disgrace of owning that i could not tell.
robin told me shortly he was sorry he had put himself about, turned his back upon me without a sign of salutation, and as he went towards the door, i could hear him telling duncan that i was "only some kinless loon that did n't know his own father."
angry as i was at these words, and ashamed of my own ignorance, i could scarce keep from smiling that a man who was under the lash of the law -lrb- and was indeed hanged some three years later -rrb- should be so nice as to the descent of his acquaintances.
just in the door, he met alan coming in; and the two drew back and looked at each other like strange dogs.
they were neither of them big men, but they seemed fairly to swell out with pride.
each wore a sword, and by a movement of his haunch, thrust clear the hilt of it, so that it might be the more readily grasped and the blade drawn.
""mr. stewart, i am thinking," says robin.
""troth, mr. macgregor, it's not a name to be ashamed of," answered alan.
""i did not know ye were in my country, sir," says robin.
""it sticks in my mind that i am in the country of my friends the maclarens," says alan.
""that's a kittle point," returned the other.
""there may be two words to say to that.
but i think i will have heard that you are a man of your sword?"
""unless ye were born deaf, mr. macgregor, ye will have heard a good deal more than that," says alan.
""i am not the only man that can draw steel in appin; and when my kinsman and captain, ardshiel, had a talk with a gentleman of your name, not so many years back, i could never hear that the macgregor had the best of it."
""do ye mean my father, sir?"
says robin.
""well, i wouldnae wonder," said alan.
""the gentleman i have in my mind had the ill-taste to clap campbell to his name."
""my father was an old man," returned robin.
""the match was unequal.
you and me would make a better pair, sir."
""i was thinking that," said alan.
i was half out of bed, and duncan had been hanging at the elbow of these fighting cocks, ready to intervene upon the least occasion.
but when that word was uttered, it was a case of now or never; and duncan, with something of a white face to be sure, thrust himself between.
""gentlemen," said he, "i will have been thinking of a very different matter, whateffer.
here are my pipes, and here are you two gentlemen who are baith acclaimed pipers.
it's an auld dispute which one of ye's the best.
here will be a braw chance to settle it."
""why, sir," said alan, still addressing robin, from whom indeed he had not so much as shifted his eyes, nor yet robin from him, "why, sir," says alan, "i think i will have heard some sough * of the sort.
have ye music, as folk say?
are ye a bit of a piper?"
* rumour.
""i can pipe like a macrimmon!"
cries robin.
""and that is a very bold word," quoth alan.
""i have made bolder words good before now," returned robin, "and that against better adversaries."
""it is easy to try that," says alan.
duncan dhu made haste to bring out the pair of pipes that was his principal possession, and to set before his guests a mutton-ham and a bottle of that drink which they call athole brose, and which is made of old whiskey, strained honey and sweet cream, slowly beaten together in the right order and proportion.
the two enemies were still on the very breach of a quarrel; but down they sat, one upon each side of the peat fire, with a mighty show of politeness.
maclaren pressed them to taste his mutton-ham and "the wife's brose," reminding them the wife was out of athole and had a name far and wide for her skill in that confection.
but robin put aside these hospitalities as bad for the breath.
""i would have ye to remark, sir," said alan, "that i havenae broken bread for near upon ten hours, which will be worse for the breath than any brose in scotland."
""i will take no advantages, mr. stewart," replied robin.
""eat and drink; i'll follow you."
each ate a small portion of the ham and drank a glass of the brose to mrs. maclaren; and then after a great number of civilities, robin took the pipes and played a little spring in a very ranting manner.
""ay, ye can blow" said alan; and taking the instrument from his rival, he first played the same spring in a manner identical with robin's; and then wandered into variations, which, as he went on, he decorated with a perfect flight of grace-notes, such as pipers love, and call the "warblers."
i had been pleased with robin's playing, alan's ravished me.
""that's no very bad, mr. stewart," said the rival, "but ye show a poor device in your warblers."
""me!"
cried alan, the blood starting to his face.
""i give ye the lie."
""do ye own yourself beaten at the pipes, then," said robin, "that ye seek to change them for the sword?"
""and that's very well said, mr. macgregor," returned alan; "and in the meantime" -lrb- laying a strong accent on the word -rrb- "i take back the lie.
i appeal to duncan."
""indeed, ye need appeal to naebody," said robin.
""ye're a far better judge than any maclaren in balquhidder: for it's a god's truth that you're a very creditable piper for a stewart.
hand me the pipes."
alan did as he asked; and robin proceeded to imitate and correct some part of alan's variations, which it seemed that he remembered perfectly.
""ay, ye have music," said alan, gloomily.
""and now be the judge yourself, mr. stewart," said robin; and taking up the variations from the beginning, he worked them throughout to so new a purpose, with such ingenuity and sentiment, and with so odd a fancy and so quick a knack in the grace-notes, that i was amazed to hear him.
as for alan, his face grew dark and hot, and he sat and gnawed his fingers, like a man under some deep affront.
""enough!"
he cried.
""ye can blow the pipes -- make the most of that."
and he made as if to rise.
but robin only held out his hand as if to ask for silence, and struck into the slow measure of a pibroch.
it was a fine piece of music in itself, and nobly played; but it seems, besides, it was a piece peculiar to the appin stewarts and a chief favourite with alan.
the first notes were scarce out, before there came a change in his face; when the time quickened, he seemed to grow restless in his seat; and long before that piece was at an end, the last signs of his anger died from him, and he had no thought but for the music.
""robin oig," he said, when it was done, "ye are a great piper.
i am not fit to blow in the same kingdom with ye.
body of me!
ye have mair music in your sporran than i have in my head!
and though it still sticks in my mind that i could maybe show ye another of it with the cold steel, i warn ye beforehand -- it'll no be fair!
it would go against my heart to haggle a man that can blow the pipes as you can!"
thereupon that quarrel was made up; all night long the brose was going and the pipes changing hands; and the day had come pretty bright, and the three men were none the better for what they had been taking, before robin as much as thought upon the road.
chapter xxvi end of the flight: we pass the forth the month, as i have said, was not yet out, but it was already far through august, and beautiful warm weather, with every sign of an early and great harvest, when i was pronounced able for my journey.
our money was now run to so low an ebb that we must think first of all on speed; for if we came not soon to mr. rankeillor's, or if when we came there he should fail to help me, we must surely starve.
in alan's view, besides, the hunt must have now greatly slackened; and the line of the forth and even stirling bridge, which is the main pass over that river, would be watched with little interest.
""it's a chief principle in military affairs," said he, "to go where ye are least expected.
forth is our trouble; ye ken the saying, "forth bridles the wild hielandman."
well, if we seek to creep round about the head of that river and come down by kippen or balfron, it's just precisely there that they'll be looking to lay hands on us.
but if we stave on straight to the auld brig of stirling, i'll lay my sword they let us pass unchallenged."
the first night, accordingly, we pushed to the house of a maclaren in strathire, a friend of duncan's, where we slept the twenty-first of the month, and whence we set forth again about the fall of night to make another easy stage.
the twenty-second we lay in a heather bush on the hillside in uam var, within view of a herd of deer, the happiest ten hours of sleep in a fine, breathing sunshine and on bone-dry ground, that i have ever tasted.
that night we struck allan water, and followed it down; and coming to the edge of the hills saw the whole carse of stirling underfoot, as flat as a pancake, with the town and castle on a hill in the midst of it, and the moon shining on the links of forth.
""now," said alan, "i kenna if ye care, but ye're in your own land again.
we passed the hieland line in the first hour; and now if we could but pass yon crooked water, we might cast our bonnets in the air."
in allan water, near by where it falls into the forth, we found a little sandy islet, overgrown with burdock, butterbur and the like low plants, that would just cover us if we lay flat.
here it was we made our camp, within plain view of stirling castle, whence we could hear the drums beat as some part of the garrison paraded.
shearers worked all day in a field on one side of the river, and we could hear the stones going on the hooks and the voices and even the words of the men talking.
it behoved to lie close and keep silent.
but the sand of the little isle was sun-warm, the green plants gave us shelter for our heads, we had food and drink in plenty; and to crown all, we were within sight of safety.
as soon as the shearers quit their work and the dusk began to fall, we waded ashore and struck for the bridge of stirling, keeping to the fields and under the field fences.
the bridge is close under the castle hill, an old, high, narrow bridge with pinnacles along the parapet; and you may conceive with how much interest i looked upon it, not only as a place famous in history, but as the very doors of salvation to alan and myself.
the moon was not yet up when we came there; a few lights shone along the front of the fortress, and lower down a few lighted windows in the town; but it was all mighty still, and there seemed to be no guard upon the passage.
i was for pushing straight across; but alan was more wary.
""it looks unco" quiet," said he; "but for all that we'll lie down here cannily behind a dyke, and make sure."
so we lay for about a quarter of an hour, whiles whispering, whiles lying still and hearing nothing earthly but the washing of the water on the piers.
at last there came by an old, hobbling woman with a crutch stick; who first stopped a little, close to where we lay, and bemoaned herself and the long way she had travelled; and then set forth again up the steep spring of the bridge.
the woman was so little, and the night still so dark, that we soon lost sight of her; only heard the sound of her steps, and her stick, and a cough that she had by fits, draw slowly farther away.
""she's bound to be across now," i whispered.
""na," said alan, "her foot still sounds boss * upon the bridge."
* hollow.
and just then -- "who goes?"
cried a voice, and we heard the butt of a musket rattle on the stones.
i must suppose the sentry had been sleeping, so that had we tried, we might have passed unseen; but he was awake now, and the chance forfeited.
""this'll never do," said alan.
""this'll never, never do for us, david."
and without another word, he began to crawl away through the fields; and a little after, being well out of eye-shot, got to his feet again, and struck along a road that led to the eastward.
i could not conceive what he was doing; and indeed i was so sharply cut by the disappointment, that i was little likely to be pleased with anything.
a moment back and i had seen myself knocking at mr. rankeillor's door to claim my inheritance, like a hero in a ballad; and here was i back again, a wandering, hunted blackguard, on the wrong side of forth.
""well?"
said i. "well," said alan, "what would ye have?
they're none such fools as i took them for.
we have still the forth to pass, davie -- weary fall the rains that fed and the hillsides that guided it!"
""and why go east?"
said i. "ou, just upon the chance!"
said he.
""if we cannae pass the river, we'll have to see what we can do for the firth."
""there are fords upon the river, and none upon the firth," said i. "to be sure there are fords, and a bridge forbye," quoth alan; "and of what service, when they are watched?"
""well," said i, "but a river can be swum."
""by them that have the skill of it," returned he; "but i have yet to hear that either you or me is much of a hand at that exercise; and for my own part, i swim like a stone."
""i'm not up to you in talking back, alan," i said; "but i can see we're making bad worse.
if it's hard to pass a river, it stands to reason it must be worse to pass a sea."
""but there's such a thing as a boat," says alan, "or i'm the more deceived."
""ay, and such a thing as money," says i. "but for us that have neither one nor other, they might just as well not have been invented."
""ye think so?"
said alan.
""i do that," said i. "david," says he, "ye're a man of small invention and less faith.
but let me set my wits upon the hone, and if i cannae beg, borrow, nor yet steal a boat, i'll make one!"
""i think i see ye!"
said i. "and what's more than all that: if ye pass a bridge, it can tell no tales; but if we pass the firth, there's the boat on the wrong side -- somebody must have brought it -- the country-side will all be in a bizz --" "man!"
cried alan, "if i make a boat, i'll make a body to take it back again!
so deave me with no more of your nonsense, but walk -lrb- for that's what you've got to do -rrb- -- and let alan think for ye."
all night, then, we walked through the north side of the carse under the high line of the ochil mountains; and by alloa and clackmannan and culross, all of which we avoided: and about ten in the morning, mighty hungry and tired, came to the little clachan of limekilns.
this is a place that sits near in by the water-side, and looks across the hope to the town of the queensferry.
smoke went up from both of these, and from other villages and farms upon all hands.
the fields were being reaped; two ships lay anchored, and boats were coming and going on the hope.
it was altogether a right pleasant sight to me; and i could not take my fill of gazing at these comfortable, green, cultivated hills and the busy people both of the field and sea.
for all that, there was mr. rankeillor's house on the south shore, where i had no doubt wealth awaited me; and here was i upon the north, clad in poor enough attire of an outlandish fashion, with three silver shillings left to me of all my fortune, a price set upon my head, and an outlawed man for my sole company.
""o, alan!"
said i, "to think of it!
over there, there's all that heart could want waiting me; and the birds go over, and the boats go over -- all that please can go, but just me only!
o, man, but it's a heart-break!"
in limekilns we entered a small change-house, which we only knew to be a public by the wand over the door, and bought some bread and cheese from a good-looking lass that was the servant.
this we carried with us in a bundle, meaning to sit and eat it in a bush of wood on the sea-shore, that we saw some third part of a mile in front.
as we went, i kept looking across the water and sighing to myself; and though i took no heed of it, alan had fallen into a muse.
at last he stopped in the way.
""did ye take heed of the lass we bought this of?"
says he, tapping on the bread and cheese.
""to be sure," said i, "and a bonny lass she was."
""ye thought that?"
cries he.
""man, david, that's good news."
""in the name of all that's wonderful, why so?"
says i. "what good can that do?"
""well," said alan, with one of his droll looks, "i was rather in hopes it would maybe get us that boat."
""if it were the other way about, it would be liker it," said i. "that's all that you ken, ye see," said alan.
""i do n't want the lass to fall in love with ye, i want her to be sorry for ye, david; to which end there is no manner of need that she should take you for a beauty.
let me see" -lrb- looking me curiously over -rrb-.
""i wish ye were a wee thing paler; but apart from that ye'll do fine for my purpose -- ye have a fine, hang-dog, rag-and-tatter, clappermaclaw kind of a look to ye, as if ye had stolen the coat from a potato-bogle.
come; right about, and back to the change-house for that boat of ours."
i followed him, laughing.
""david balfour," said he, "ye're a very funny gentleman by your way of it, and this is a very funny employ for ye, no doubt.
for all that, if ye have any affection for my neck -lrb- to say nothing of your own -rrb- ye will perhaps be kind enough to take this matter responsibly.
i am going to do a bit of play-acting, the bottom ground of which is just exactly as serious as the gallows for the pair of us.
so bear it, if ye please, in mind, and conduct yourself according."
""well, well," said i, "have it as you will."
as we got near the clachan, he made me take his arm and hang upon it like one almost helpless with weariness; and by the time he pushed open the change-house door, he seemed to be half carrying me.
the maid appeared surprised -lrb- as well she might be -rrb- at our speedy return; but alan had no words to spare for her in explanation, helped me to a chair, called for a tass of brandy with which he fed me in little sips, and then breaking up the bread and cheese helped me to eat it like a nursery-lass; the whole with that grave, concerned, affectionate countenance, that might have imposed upon a judge.
it was small wonder if the maid were taken with the picture we presented, of a poor, sick, overwrought lad and his most tender comrade.
she drew quite near, and stood leaning with her back on the next table.
""what's like wrong with him?"
said she at last.
alan turned upon her, to my great wonder, with a kind of fury.
""wrong?"
cries he.
""he's walked more hundreds of miles than he has hairs upon his chin, and slept oftener in wet heather than dry sheets.
wrong, quo" she!
wrong enough, i would think!
wrong, indeed!"
and he kept grumbling to himself as he fed me, like a man ill-pleased.
""he's young for the like of that," said the maid.
""ower young," said alan, with his back to her.
""he would be better riding," says she.
""and where could i get a horse to him?"
cried alan, turning on her with the same appearance of fury.
""would ye have me steal?"
i thought this roughness would have sent her off in dudgeon, as indeed it closed her mouth for the time.
but my companion knew very well what he was doing; and for as simple as he was in some things of life, had a great fund of roguishness in such affairs as these.
""ye neednae tell me," she said at last -- "ye're gentry."
""well," said alan, softened a little -lrb- i believe against his will -rrb- by this artless comment, "and suppose we were?
did ever you hear that gentrice put money in folk's pockets?"
she sighed at this, as if she were herself some disinherited great lady.
""no," says she, "that's true indeed."
i was all this while chafing at the part i played, and sitting tongue-tied between shame and merriment; but somehow at this i could hold in no longer, and bade alan let me be, for i was better already.
my voice stuck in my throat, for i ever hated to take part in lies; but my very embarrassment helped on the plot, for the lass no doubt set down my husky voice to sickness and fatigue.
""has he nae friends?"
said she, in a tearful voice.
""that has he so!"
cried alan, "if we could but win to them!
-- friends and rich friends, beds to lie in, food to eat, doctors to see to him -- and here he must tramp in the dubs and sleep in the heather like a beggarman."
""and why that?"
says the lass.
""my dear," said alan, "i cannae very safely say; but i'll tell ye what i'll do instead," says he, "i'll whistle ye a bit tune."
and with that he leaned pretty far over the table, and in a mere breath of a whistle, but with a wonderful pretty sentiment, gave her a few bars of "charlie is my darling."
""wheesht," says she, and looked over her shoulder to the door.
""that's it," said alan.
""and him so young!"
cries the lass.
""he's old enough to --" and alan struck his forefinger on the back part of his neck, meaning that i was old enough to lose my head.
""it would be a black shame," she cried, flushing high.
""it's what will be, though," said alan, "unless we manage the better."
at this the lass turned and ran out of that part of the house, leaving us alone together.
alan in high good humour at the furthering of his schemes, and i in bitter dudgeon at being called a jacobite and treated like a child.
""alan," i cried, "i can stand no more of this."
""ye'll have to sit it then, davie," said he.
""for if ye upset the pot now, ye may scrape your own life out of the fire, but alan breck is a dead man."
this was so true that i could only groan; and even my groan served alan's purpose, for it was overheard by the lass as she came flying in again with a dish of white puddings and a bottle of strong ale.
""poor lamb!"
says she, and had no sooner set the meat before us, than she touched me on the shoulder with a little friendly touch, as much as to bid me cheer up.
then she told us to fall to, and there would be no more to pay; for the inn was her own, or at least her father's, and he was gone for the day to pittencrieff.
we waited for no second bidding, for bread and cheese is but cold comfort and the puddings smelt excellently well; and while we sat and ate, she took up that same place by the next table, looking on, and thinking, and frowning to herself, and drawing the string of her apron through her hand.
""i'm thinking ye have rather a long tongue," she said at last to alan.
""ay" said alan; "but ye see i ken the folk i speak to."
""i would never betray ye," said she, "if ye mean that."
""no," said he, "ye're not that kind.
but i'll tell ye what ye would do, ye would help."
""i couldnae," said she, shaking her head.
""na, i couldnae."
""no," said he, "but if ye could?"
she answered him nothing.
""look here, my lass," said alan, "there are boats in the kingdom of fife, for i saw two -lrb- no less -rrb- upon the beach, as i came in by your town's end.
now if we could have the use of a boat to pass under cloud of night into lothian, and some secret, decent kind of a man to bring that boat back again and keep his counsel, there would be two souls saved -- mine to all likelihood -- his to a dead surety.
if we lack that boat, we have but three shillings left in this wide world; and where to go, and how to do, and what other place there is for us except the chains of a gibbet -- i give you my naked word, i kenna!
shall we go wanting, lassie?
are ye to lie in your warm bed and think upon us, when the wind gowls in the chimney and the rain tirls on the roof?
are ye to eat your meat by the cheeks of a red fire, and think upon this poor sick lad of mine, biting his finger ends on a blae muir for cauld and hunger?
sick or sound, he must aye be moving; with the death grapple at his throat he must aye be trailing in the rain on the lang roads; and when he gants his last on a rickle of cauld stanes, there will be nae friends near him but only me and god."
at this appeal, i could see the lass was in great trouble of mind, being tempted to help us, and yet in some fear she might be helping malefactors; and so now i determined to step in myself and to allay her scruples with a portion of the truth.
""did ever you hear," said i, "of mr. rankeillor of the ferry?"
""rankeillor the writer?"
said she.
""i daur say that!"
""well," said i, "it's to his door that i am bound, so you may judge by that if i am an ill-doer; and i will tell you more, that though i am indeed, by a dreadful error, in some peril of my life, king george has no truer friend in all scotland than myself."
her face cleared up mightily at this, although alan's darkened.
""that's more than i would ask," said she.
""mr. rankeillor is a kennt man."
and she bade us finish our meat, get clear of the clachan as soon as might be, and lie close in the bit wood on the sea-beach.
""and ye can trust me," says she, "i'll find some means to put you over."
at this we waited for no more, but shook hands with her upon the bargain, made short work of the puddings, and set forth again from limekilns as far as to the wood.
it was a small piece of perhaps a score of elders and hawthorns and a few young ashes, not thick enough to veil us from passersby upon the road or beach.
here we must lie, however, making the best of the brave warm weather and the good hopes we now had of a deliverance, and planing more particularly what remained for us to do.
we had but one trouble all day; when a strolling piper came and sat in the same wood with us; a red-nosed, bleareyed, drunken dog, with a great bottle of whisky in his pocket, and a long story of wrongs that had been done him by all sorts of persons, from the lord president of the court of session, who had denied him justice, down to the bailies of inverkeithing who had given him more of it than he desired.
it was impossible but he should conceive some suspicion of two men lying all day concealed in a thicket and having no business to allege.
as long as he stayed there he kept us in hot water with prying questions; and after he was gone, as he was a man not very likely to hold his tongue, we were in the greater impatience to be gone ourselves.
the day came to an end with the same brightness; the night fell quiet and clear; lights came out in houses and hamlets and then, one after another, began to be put out; but it was past eleven, and we were long since strangely tortured with anxieties, before we heard the grinding of oars upon the rowing-pins.
at that, we looked out and saw the lass herself coming rowing to us in a boat.
she had trusted no one with our affairs, not even her sweetheart, if she had one; but as soon as her father was asleep, had left the house by a window, stolen a neighbour's boat, and come to our assistance single-handed.
i was abashed how to find expression for my thanks; but she was no less abashed at the thought of hearing them; begged us to lose no time and to hold our peace, saying -lrb- very properly -rrb- that the heart of our matter was in haste and silence; and so, what with one thing and another, she had set us on the lothian shore not far from carriden, had shaken hands with us, and was out again at sea and rowing for limekilns, before there was one word said either of her service or our gratitude.
even after she was gone, we had nothing to say, as indeed nothing was enough for such a kindness.
only alan stood a great while upon the shore shaking his head.
""it is a very fine lass," he said at last.
""david, it is a very fine lass."
and a matter of an hour later, as we were lying in a den on the sea-shore and i had been already dozing, he broke out again in commendations of her character.
for my part, i could say nothing, she was so simple a creature that my heart smote me both with remorse and fear: remorse because we had traded upon her ignorance; and fear lest we should have anyway involved her in the dangers of our situation.
chapter xxvii i come to mr. rankeillor the next day it was agreed that alan should fend for himself till sunset; but as soon as it began to grow dark, he should lie in the fields by the roadside near to newhalls, and stir for naught until he heard me whistling.
at first i proposed i should give him for a signal the "bonnie house of airlie," which was a favourite of mine; but he objected that as the piece was very commonly known, any ploughman might whistle it by accident; and taught me instead a little fragment of a highland air, which has run in my head from that day to this, and will likely run in my head when i lie dying.
every time it comes to me, it takes me off to that last day of my uncertainty, with alan sitting up in the bottom of the den, whistling and beating the measure with a finger, and the grey of the dawn coming on his face.
i was in the long street of queensferry before the sun was up.
it was a fairly built burgh, the houses of good stone, many slated; the town-hall not so fine, i thought, as that of peebles, nor yet the street so noble; but take it altogether, it put me to shame for my foul tatters.
as the morning went on, and the fires began to be kindled, and the windows to open, and the people to appear out of the houses, my concern and despondency grew ever the blacker.
i saw now that i had no grounds to stand upon; and no clear proof of my rights, nor so much as of my own identity.
if it was all a bubble, i was indeed sorely cheated and left in a sore pass.
even if things were as i conceived, it would in all likelihood take time to establish my contentions; and what time had i to spare with less than three shillings in my pocket, and a condemned, hunted man upon my hands to ship out of the country?
truly, if my hope broke with me, it might come to the gallows yet for both of us.
and as i continued to walk up and down, and saw people looking askance at me upon the street or out of windows, and nudging or speaking one to another with smiles, i began to take a fresh apprehension: that it might be no easy matter even to come to speech of the lawyer, far less to convince him of my story.
for the life of me i could not muster up the courage to address any of these reputable burghers; i thought shame even to speak with them in such a pickle of rags and dirt; and if i had asked for the house of such a man as mr. rankeillor, i suppose they would have burst out laughing in my face.
so i went up and down, and through the street, and down to the harbour-side, like a dog that has lost its master, with a strange gnawing in my inwards, and every now and then a movement of despair.
it grew to be high day at last, perhaps nine in the forenoon; and i was worn with these wanderings, and chanced to have stopped in front of a very good house on the landward side, a house with beautiful, clear glass windows, flowering knots upon the sills, the walls new-harled * and a chase-dog sitting yawning on the step like one that was at home.
well, i was even envying this dumb brute, when the door fell open and there issued forth a shrewd, ruddy, kindly, consequential man in a well-powdered wig and spectacles.
i was in such a plight that no one set eyes on me once, but he looked at me again; and this gentleman, as it proved, was so much struck with my poor appearance that he came straight up to me and asked me what i did.
* newly rough-cast.
i told him i was come to the queensferry on business, and taking heart of grace, asked him to direct me to the house of mr. rankeillor.
""why," said he, "that is his house that i have just come out of; and for a rather singular chance, i am that very man."
""then, sir," said i, "i have to beg the favour of an interview."
""i do not know your name," said he, "nor yet your face."
""my name is david balfour," said i. "david balfour?"
he repeated, in rather a high tone, like one surprised.
""and where have you come from, mr. david balfour?"
he asked, looking me pretty drily in the face.
""i have come from a great many strange places, sir," said i; "but i think it would be as well to tell you where and how in a more private manner."
he seemed to muse awhile, holding his lip in his hand, and looking now at me and now upon the causeway of the street.
""yes," says he, "that will be the best, no doubt."
and he led me back with him into his house, cried out to some one whom i could not see that he would be engaged all morning, and brought me into a little dusty chamber full of books and documents.
here he sate down, and bade me be seated; though i thought he looked a little ruefully from his clean chair to my muddy rags.
""and now," says he, "if you have any business, pray be brief and come swiftly to the point.
nec gemino bellum trojanum orditur ab ovo -- do you understand that?"
says he, with a keen look.
""i will even do as horace says, sir," i answered, smiling, "and carry you in medias res."
he nodded as if he was well pleased, and indeed his scrap of latin had been set to test me.
for all that, and though i was somewhat encouraged, the blood came in my face when i added: "i have reason to believe myself some rights on the estate of shaws."
he got a paper book out of a drawer and set it before him open.
""well?"
said he.
but i had shot my bolt and sat speechless.
""come, come, mr. balfour," said he, "you must continue.
where were you born?"
""in essendean, sir," said i, "the year 1733, the 12th of march."
he seemed to follow this statement in his paper book; but what that meant i knew not.
""your father and mother?"
said he.
""my father was alexander balfour, schoolmaster of that place," said i, "and my mother grace pitarrow; i think her people were from angus."
""have you any papers proving your identity?"
asked mr. rankeillor.
""no, sir," said i, "but they are in the hands of mr. campbell, the minister, and could be readily produced.
mr. campbell, too, would give me his word; and for that matter, i do not think my uncle would deny me."
""meaning mr. ebenezer balfour?"
says he.
""the same," said i. "whom you have seen?"
he asked.
""by whom i was received into his own house," i answered.
""did you ever meet a man of the name of hoseason?"
asked mr. rankeillor.
""i did so, sir, for my sins," said i; "for it was by his means and the procurement of my uncle, that i was kidnapped within sight of this town, carried to sea, suffered shipwreck and a hundred other hardships, and stand before you to-day in this poor accoutrement."
""you say you were shipwrecked," said rankeillor; "where was that?"
""off the south end of the isle of mull," said i. "the name of the isle on which i was cast up is the island earraid."
""ah!"
says he, smiling, "you are deeper than me in the geography.
but so far, i may tell you, this agrees pretty exactly with other informations that i hold.
but you say you were kidnapped; in what sense?"
""in the plain meaning of the word, sir," said i. "i was on my way to your house, when i was trepanned on board the brig, cruelly struck down, thrown below, and knew no more of anything till we were far at sea.
i was destined for the plantations; a fate that, in god's providence, i have escaped."
""the brig was lost on june the 27th," says he, looking in his book, "and we are now at august the 24th.
here is a considerable hiatus, mr. balfour, of near upon two months.
it has already caused a vast amount of trouble to your friends; and i own i shall not be very well contented until it is set right."
""indeed, sir," said i, "these months are very easily filled up; but yet before i told my story, i would be glad to know that i was talking to a friend."
""this is to argue in a circle," said the lawyer.
""i can not be convinced till i have heard you.
i can not be your friend till i am properly informed.
if you were more trustful, it would better befit your time of life.
and you know, mr. balfour, we have a proverb in the country that evil-doers are aye evil-dreaders."
""you are not to forget, sir," said i, "that i have already suffered by my trustfulness; and was shipped off to be a slave by the very man that -lrb- if i rightly understand -rrb- is your employer?"
all this while i had been gaining ground with mr. rankeillor, and in proportion as i gained ground, gaining confidence.
but at this sally, which i made with something of a smile myself, he fairly laughed aloud.
""no, no," said he, "it is not so bad as that.
fui, non sum.
i was indeed your uncle's man of business; but while you -lrb- imberbis juvenis custode remoto -rrb- were gallivanting in the west, a good deal of water has run under the bridges; and if your ears did not sing, it was not for lack of being talked about.
on the very day of your sea disaster, mr. campbell stalked into my office, demanding you from all the winds.
i had never heard of your existence; but i had known your father; and from matters in my competence -lrb- to be touched upon hereafter -rrb- i was disposed to fear the worst.
mr. ebenezer admitted having seen you; declared -lrb- what seemed improbable -rrb- that he had given you considerable sums; and that you had started for the continent of europe, intending to fulfil your education, which was probable and praiseworthy.
interrogated how you had come to send no word to mr. campbell, he deponed that you had expressed a great desire to break with your past life.
further interrogated where you now were, protested ignorance, but believed you were in leyden.
that is a close sum of his replies.
i am not exactly sure that any one believed him," continued mr. rankeillor with a smile; "and in particular he so much disrelished me expressions of mine that -lrb- in a word -rrb- he showed me to the door.
we were then at a full stand; for whatever shrewd suspicions we might entertain, we had no shadow of probation.
in the very article, comes captain hoseason with the story of your drowning; whereupon all fell through; with no consequences but concern to mr. campbell, injury to my pocket, and another blot upon your uncle's character, which could very ill afford it.
and now, mr. balfour," said he, "you understand the whole process of these matters, and can judge for yourself to what extent i may be trusted."
indeed he was more pedantic than i can represent him, and placed more scraps of latin in his speech; but it was all uttered with a fine geniality of eye and manner which went far to conquer my distrust.
moreover, i could see he now treated me as if i was myself beyond a doubt; so that first point of my identity seemed fully granted.
""sir," said i, "if i tell you my story, i must commit a friend's life to your discretion.
pass me your word it shall be sacred; and for what touches myself, i will ask no better guarantee than just your face."
he passed me his word very seriously.
""but," said he, "these are rather alarming prolocutions; and if there are in your story any little jostles to the law, i would beg you to bear in mind that i am a lawyer, and pass lightly."
thereupon i told him my story from the first, he listening with his spectacles thrust up and his eyes closed, so that i sometimes feared he was asleep.
but no such matter!
he heard every word -lrb- as i found afterward -rrb- with such quickness of hearing and precision of memory as often surprised me.
even strange outlandish gaelic names, heard for that time only, he remembered and would remind me of, years after.
yet when i called alan breck in full, we had an odd scene.
the name of alan had of course rung through scotland, with the news of the appin murder and the offer of the reward; and it had no sooner escaped me than the lawyer moved in his seat and opened his eyes.
""i would name no unnecessary names, mr. balfour," said he; "above all of highlanders, many of whom are obnoxious to the law."
""well, it might have been better not," said i, "but since i have let it slip, i may as well continue."
""not at all," said mr. rankeillor.
""i am somewhat dull of hearing, as you may have remarked; and i am far from sure i caught the name exactly.
we will call your friend, if you please, mr. thomson -- that there may be no reflections.
and in future, i would take some such way with any highlander that you may have to mention -- dead or alive."
by this, i saw he must have heard the name all too clearly, and had already guessed i might be coming to the murder.
if he chose to play this part of ignorance, it was no matter of mine; so i smiled, said it was no very highland-sounding name, and consented.
through all the rest of my story alan was mr. thomson; which amused me the more, as it was a piece of policy after his own heart.
james stewart, in like manner, was mentioned under the style of mr. thomson's kinsman; colin campbell passed as a mr. glen; and to cluny, when i came to that part of my tale, i gave the name of "mr. jameson, a highland chief."
it was truly the most open farce, and i wondered that the lawyer should care to keep it up; but, after all, it was quite in the taste of that age, when there were two parties in the state, and quiet persons, with no very high opinions of their own, sought out every cranny to avoid offence to either.
""well, well," said the lawyer, when i had quite done, "this is a great epic, a great odyssey of yours.
you must tell it, sir, in a sound latinity when your scholarship is riper; or in english if you please, though for my part i prefer the stronger tongue.
you have rolled much; quae regio in terris -- what parish in scotland -lrb- to make a homely translation -rrb- has not been filled with your wanderings?
you have shown, besides, a singular aptitude for getting into false positions; and, yes, upon the whole, for behaving well in them.
this mr. thomson seems to me a gentleman of some choice qualities, though perhaps a trifle bloody-minded.
it would please me none the worse, if -lrb- with all his merits -rrb- he were soused in the north sea, for the man, mr. david, is a sore embarrassment.
but you are doubtless quite right to adhere to him; indubitably, he adhered to you.
it comes -- we may say -- he was your true companion; nor less paribus curis vestigia figit, for i dare say you would both take an orra thought upon the gallows.
well, well, these days are fortunately by; and i think -lrb- speaking humanly -rrb- that you are near the end of your troubles."
as he thus moralised on my adventures, he looked upon me with so much humour and benignity that i could scarce contain my satisfaction.
i had been so long wandering with lawless people, and making my bed upon the hills and under the bare sky, that to sit once more in a clean, covered house, and to talk amicably with a gentleman in broadcloth, seemed mighty elevations.
even as i thought so, my eye fell on my unseemly tatters, and i was once more plunged in confusion.
but the lawyer saw and understood me.
he rose, called over the stair to lay another plate, for mr. balfour would stay to dinner, and led me into a bedroom in the upper part of the house.
here he set before me water and soap, and a comb; and laid out some clothes that belonged to his son; and here, with another apposite tag, he left me to my toilet.
chapter xxviii i go in quest of my inheritance i made what change i could in my appearance; and blithe was i to look in the glass and find the beggarman a thing of the past, and david balfour come to life again.
and yet i was ashamed of the change too, and, above all, of the borrowed clothes.
when i had done, mr. rankeillor caught me on the stair, made me his compliments, and had me again into the cabinet.
""sit ye down, mr. david," said he, "and now that you are looking a little more like yourself, let me see if i can find you any news.
you will be wondering, no doubt, about your father and your uncle?
to be sure it is a singular tale; and the explanation is one that i blush to have to offer you.
for," says he, really with embarrassment, "the matter hinges on a love affair."
""truly," said i, "i can not very well join that notion with my uncle."
""but your uncle, mr. david, was not always old," replied the lawyer, "and what may perhaps surprise you more, not always ugly.
he had a fine, gallant air; people stood in their doors to look after him, as he went by upon a mettle horse.
i have seen it with these eyes, and i ingenuously confess, not altogether without envy; for i was a plain lad myself and a plain man's son; and in those days it was a case of odi te, qui bellus es, sabelle."
""it sounds like a dream," said i. "ay, ay," said the lawyer, "that is how it is with youth and age.
nor was that all, but he had a spirit of his own that seemed to promise great things in the future.
in 1715, what must he do but run away to join the rebels?
it was your father that pursued him, found him in a ditch, and brought him back multum gementem; to the mirth of the whole country.
however, majora canamus -- the two lads fell in love, and that with the same lady.
mr. ebenezer, who was the admired and the beloved, and the spoiled one, made, no doubt, mighty certain of the victory; and when he found he had deceived himself, screamed like a peacock.
the whole country heard of it; now he lay sick at home, with his silly family standing round the bed in tears; now he rode from public-house to public-house, and shouted his sorrows into the lug of tom, dick, and harry.
your father, mr. david, was a kind gentleman; but he was weak, dolefully weak; took all this folly with a long countenance; and one day -- by your leave!
-- resigned the lady.
she was no such fool, however; it's from her you must inherit your excellent good sense; and she refused to be bandied from one to another.
both got upon their knees to her; and the upshot of the matter for that while was that she showed both of them the door.
that was in august; dear me!
the same year i came from college.
the scene must have been highly farcical."
i thought myself it was a silly business, but i could not forget my father had a hand in it.
""surely, sir, it had some note of tragedy," said i. "why, no, sir, not at all," returned the lawyer.
""for tragedy implies some ponderable matter in dispute, some dignus vindice nodus; and this piece of work was all about the petulance of a young ass that had been spoiled, and wanted nothing so much as to be tied up and soundly belted.
however, that was not your father's view; and the end of it was, that from concession to concession on your father's part, and from one height to another of squalling, sentimental selfishness upon your uncle's, they came at last to drive a sort of bargain, from whose ill results you have recently been smarting.
the one man took the lady, the other the estate.
now, mr. david, they talk a great deal of charity and generosity; but in this disputable state of life, i often think the happiest consequences seem to flow when a gentleman consults his lawyer, and takes all the law allows him.
anyhow, this piece of quixotry on your father's part, as it was unjust in itself, has brought forth a monstrous family of injustices.
your father and mother lived and died poor folk; you were poorly reared; and in the meanwhile, what a time it has been for the tenants on the estate of shaws!
and i might add -lrb- if it was a matter i cared much about -rrb- what a time for mr. ebenezer!"
""and yet that is certainly the strangest part of all," said i, "that a man's nature should thus change."
""true," said mr. rankeillor.
""and yet i imagine it was natural enough.
he could not think that he had played a handsome part.
those who knew the story gave him the cold shoulder; those who knew it not, seeing one brother disappear, and the other succeed in the estate, raised a cry of murder; so that upon all sides he found himself evited.
money was all he got by his bargain; well, he came to think the more of money.
he was selfish when he was young, he is selfish now that he is old; and the latter end of all these pretty manners and fine feelings you have seen for yourself."
""well, sir," said i, "and in all this, what is my position?"
""the estate is yours beyond a doubt," replied the lawyer.
""it matters nothing what your father signed, you are the heir of entail.
but your uncle is a man to fight the indefensible; and it would be likely your identity that he would call in question.
a lawsuit is always expensive, and a family lawsuit always scandalous; besides which, if any of your doings with your friend mr. thomson were to come out, we might find that we had burned our fingers.
the kidnapping, to be sure, would be a court card upon our side, if we could only prove it.
but it may be difficult to prove; and my advice -lrb- upon the whole -rrb- is to make a very easy bargain with your uncle, perhaps even leaving him at shaws where he has taken root for a quarter of a century, and contenting yourself in the meanwhile with a fair provision."
i told him i was very willing to be easy, and that to carry family concerns before the public was a step from which i was naturally much averse.
in the meantime -lrb- thinking to myself -rrb- i began to see the outlines of that scheme on which we afterwards acted.
""the great affair," i asked, "is to bring home to him the kidnapping?"
""surely," said mr. rankeillor, "and if possible, out of court.
for mark you here, mr. david: we could no doubt find some men of the covenant who would swear to your reclusion; but once they were in the box, we could no longer check their testimony, and some word of your friend mr. thomson must certainly crop out.
which -lrb- from what you have let fall -rrb- i can not think to be desirable."
""well, sir," said i, "here is my way of it."
and i opened my plot to him.
""but this would seem to involve my meeting the man thomson?"
says he, when i had done.
""i think so, indeed, sir," said i. "dear doctor!"
cries he, rubbing his brow.
""dear doctor!
no, mr. david, i am afraid your scheme is inadmissible.
i say nothing against your friend, mr. thomson: i know nothing against him; and if i did -- mark this, mr. david!
-- it would be my duty to lay hands on him.
now i put it to you: is it wise to meet?
he may have matters to his charge.
he may not have told you all.
his name may not be even thomson!"
cries the lawyer, twinkling; "for some of these fellows will pick up names by the roadside as another would gather haws."
""you must be the judge, sir," said i.
but it was clear my plan had taken hold upon his fancy, for he kept musing to himself till we were called to dinner and the company of mrs. rankeillor; and that lady had scarce left us again to ourselves and a bottle of wine, ere he was back harping on my proposal.
when and where was i to meet my friend mr. thomson; was i sure of mr. t.'s discretion; supposing we could catch the old fox tripping, would i consent to such and such a term of an agreement -- these and the like questions he kept asking at long intervals, while he thoughtfully rolled his wine upon his tongue.
when i had answered all of them, seemingly to his contentment, he fell into a still deeper muse, even the claret being now forgotten.
then he got a sheet of paper and a pencil, and set to work writing and weighing every word; and at last touched a bell and had his clerk into the chamber.
""torrance," said he, "i must have this written out fair against to-night; and when it is done, you will be so kind as put on your hat and be ready to come along with this gentleman and me, for you will probably be wanted as a witness."
""what, sir," cried i, as soon as the clerk was gone, "are you to venture it?"
""why, so it would appear," says he, filling his glass.
""but let us speak no more of business.
the very sight of torrance brings in my head a little droll matter of some years ago, when i had made a tryst with the poor oaf at the cross of edinburgh.
each had gone his proper errand; and when it came four o'clock, torrance had been taking a glass and did not know his master, and i, who had forgot my spectacles, was so blind without them, that i give you my word i did not know my own clerk."
and thereupon he laughed heartily.
i said it was an odd chance, and smiled out of politeness; but what held me all the afternoon in wonder, he kept returning and dwelling on this story, and telling it again with fresh details and laughter; so that i began at last to be quite put out of countenance and feel ashamed for my friend's folly.
towards the time i had appointed with alan, we set out from the house, mr. rankeillor and i arm in arm, and torrance following behind with the deed in his pocket and a covered basket in his hand.
all through the town, the lawyer was bowing right and left, and continually being button-holed by gentlemen on matters of burgh or private business; and i could see he was one greatly looked up to in the county.
at last we were clear of the houses, and began to go along the side of the haven and towards the hawes inn and the ferry pier, the scene of my misfortune.
i could not look upon the place without emotion, recalling how many that had been there with me that day were now no more: ransome taken, i could hope, from the evil to come; shuan passed where i dared not follow him; and the poor souls that had gone down with the brig in her last plunge.
all these, and the brig herself, i had outlived; and come through these hardships and fearful perils without scath.
my only thought should have been of gratitude; and yet i could not behold the place without sorrow for others and a chill of recollected fear.
i was so thinking when, upon a sudden, mr. rankeillor cried out, clapped his hand to his pockets, and began to laugh.
""why," he cries, "if this be not a farcical adventure!
after all that i said, i have forgot my glasses!"
at that, of course, i understood the purpose of his anecdote, and knew that if he had left his spectacles at home, it had been done on purpose, so that he might have the benefit of alan's help without the awkwardness of recognising him.
and indeed it was well thought upon; for now -lrb- suppose things to go the very worst -rrb- how could rankeillor swear to my friend's identity, or how be made to bear damaging evidence against myself?
for all that, he had been a long while of finding out his want, and had spoken to and recognised a good few persons as we came through the town; and i had little doubt myself that he saw reasonably well.
as soon as we were past the hawes -lrb- where i recognised the landlord smoking his pipe in the door, and was amazed to see him look no older -rrb- mr. rankeillor changed the order of march, walking behind with torrance and sending me forward in the manner of a scout.
i went up the hill, whistling from time to time my gaelic air; and at length i had the pleasure to hear it answered and to see alan rise from behind a bush.
he was somewhat dashed in spirits, having passed a long day alone skulking in the county, and made but a poor meal in an alehouse near dundas.
but at the mere sight of my clothes, he began to brighten up; and as soon as i had told him in what a forward state our matters were and the part i looked to him to play in what remained, he sprang into a new man.
""and that is a very good notion of yours," says he; "and i dare to say that you could lay your hands upon no better man to put it through than alan breck.
it is not a thing -lrb- mark ye -rrb- that any one could do, but takes a gentleman of penetration.
but it sticks in my head your lawyer-man will be somewhat wearying to see me," says alan.
accordingly i cried and waved on mr. rankeillor, who came up alone and was presented to my friend, mr. thomson.
""mr. thomson, i am pleased to meet you," said he.
""but i have forgotten my glasses; and our friend, mr. david here" -lrb- clapping me on the shoulder -rrb-, "will tell you that i am little better than blind, and that you must not be surprised if i pass you by to-morrow."
this he said, thinking that alan would be pleased; but the highlandman's vanity was ready to startle at a less matter than that.
""why, sir," says he, stiffly, "i would say it mattered the less as we are met here for a particular end, to see justice done to mr. balfour; and by what i can see, not very likely to have much else in common.
but i accept your apology, which was a very proper one to make."
""and that is more than i could look for, mr. thomson," said rankeillor, heartily.
""and now as you and i are the chief actors in this enterprise, i think we should come into a nice agreement; to which end, i propose that you should lend me your arm, for -lrb- what with the dusk and the want of my glasses -rrb- i am not very clear as to the path; and as for you, mr. david, you will find torrance a pleasant kind of body to speak with.
only let me remind you, it's quite needless he should hear more of your adventures or those of -- ahem -- mr. thomson."
accordingly these two went on ahead in very close talk, and torrance and i brought up the rear.
night was quite come when we came in view of the house of shaws.
ten had been gone some time; it was dark and mild, with a pleasant, rustling wind in the south-west that covered the sound of our approach; and as we drew near we saw no glimmer of light in any portion of the building.
it seemed my uncle was already in bed, which was indeed the best thing for our arrangements.
we made our last whispered consultations some fifty yards away; and then the lawyer and torrance and i crept quietly up and crouched down beside the corner of the house; and as soon as we were in our places, alan strode to the door without concealment and began to knock.
chapter xxix i come into my kingdom for some time alan volleyed upon the door, and his knocking only roused the echoes of the house and neighbourhood.
at last, however, i could hear the noise of a window gently thrust up, and knew that my uncle had come to his observatory.
by what light there was, he would see alan standing, like a dark shadow, on the steps; the three witnesses were hidden quite out of his view; so that there was nothing to alarm an honest man in his own house.
for all that, he studied his visitor awhile in silence, and when he spoke his voice had a quaver of misgiving.
""what's this?"
says he.
""this is nae kind of time of night for decent folk; and i hae nae trokings * wi" night-hawks.
what brings ye here?
i have a blunderbush."
* dealings.
""is that yoursel", mr. balfour?"
returned alan, stepping back and looking up into the darkness.
""have a care of that blunderbuss; they're nasty things to burst."
""what brings ye here?
and whae are ye?"
says my uncle, angrily.
""i have no manner of inclination to rowt out my name to the country-side," said alan; "but what brings me here is another story, being more of your affair than mine; and if ye're sure it's what ye would like, i'll set it to a tune and sing it to you."
""and what is "t?"
asked my uncle.
""david," says alan.
""what was that?"
cried my uncle, in a mighty changed voice.
""shall i give ye the rest of the name, then?"
said alan.
there was a pause; and then, "i'm thinking i'll better let ye in," says my uncle, doubtfully.
""i dare say that," said alan; "but the point is, would i go?
now i will tell you what i am thinking.
i am thinking that it is here upon this doorstep that we must confer upon this business; and it shall be here or nowhere at all whatever; for i would have you to understand that i am as stiffnecked as yoursel", and a gentleman of better family."
this change of note disconcerted ebenezer; he was a little while digesting it, and then says he, "weel, weel, what must be must," and shut the window.
but it took him a long time to get down-stairs, and a still longer to undo the fastenings, repenting -lrb- i dare say -rrb- and taken with fresh claps of fear at every second step and every bolt and bar.
at last, however, we heard the creak of the hinges, and it seems my uncle slipped gingerly out and -lrb- seeing that alan had stepped back a pace or two -rrb- sate him down on the top doorstep with the blunderbuss ready in his hands.
""and, now" says he, "mind i have my blunderbush, and if ye take a step nearer ye're as good as deid."
""and a very civil speech," says alan, "to be sure."
""na," says my uncle, "but this is no a very chanty kind of a proceeding, and i'm bound to be prepared.
and now that we understand each other, ye'll can name your business."
""why," says alan, "you that are a man of so much understanding, will doubtless have perceived that i am a hieland gentleman.
my name has nae business in my story; but the county of my friends is no very far from the isle of mull, of which ye will have heard.
it seems there was a ship lost in those parts; and the next day a gentleman of my family was seeking wreck-wood for his fire along the sands, when he came upon a lad that was half drowned.
well, he brought him to; and he and some other gentleman took and clapped him in an auld, ruined castle, where from that day to this he has been a great expense to my friends.
my friends are a wee wild-like, and not so particular about the law as some that i could name; and finding that the lad owned some decent folk, and was your born nephew, mr. balfour, they asked me to give ye a bit call and confer upon the matter.
and i may tell ye at the off-go, unless we can agree upon some terms, ye are little likely to set eyes upon him.
for my friends," added alan, simply, "are no very well off."
my uncle cleared his throat.
""i'm no very caring," says he.
""he wasnae a good lad at the best of it, and i've nae call to interfere."
""ay, ay," said alan, "i see what ye would be at: pretending ye do n't care, to make the ransom smaller."
""na," said my uncle, "it's the mere truth.
i take nae manner of interest in the lad, and i'll pay nae ransome, and ye can make a kirk and a mill of him for what i care."
""hoot, sir," says alan.
""blood's thicker than water, in the deil's name!
ye cannae desert your brother's son for the fair shame of it; and if ye did, and it came to be kennt, ye wouldnae be very popular in your country-side, or i'm the more deceived."
""i'm no just very popular the way it is," returned ebenezer; "and i dinnae see how it would come to be kennt.
no by me, onyway; nor yet by you or your friends.
so that's idle talk, my buckie," says he.
""then it'll have to be david that tells it," said alan.
""how that?"
says my uncle, sharply.
""ou, just this way," says alan.
""my friends would doubtless keep your nephew as long as there was any likelihood of siller to be made of it, but if there was nane, i am clearly of opinion they would let him gang where he pleased, and be damned to him!"
""ay, but i'm no very caring about that either," said my uncle.
""i wouldnae be muckle made up with that."
""i was thinking that," said alan.
""and what for why?"
asked ebenezer.
""why, mr. balfour," replied alan, "by all that i could hear, there were two ways of it: either ye liked david and would pay to get him back; or else ye had very good reasons for not wanting him, and would pay for us to keep him.
it seems it's not the first; well then, it's the second; and blythe am i to ken it, for it should be a pretty penny in my pocket and the pockets of my friends."
""i dinnae follow ye there," said my uncle.
""no?"
said alan.
""well, see here: you dinnae want the lad back; well, what do ye want done with him, and how much will ye pay?"
my uncle made no answer, but shifted uneasily on his seat.
""come, sir," cried alan.
""i would have you to ken that i am a gentleman; i bear a king's name; i am nae rider to kick my shanks at your hall door.
either give me an answer in civility, and that out of hand; or by the top of glencoe, i will ram three feet of iron through your vitals."
""eh, man," cried my uncle, scrambling to his feet, "give me a meenit!
what's like wrong with ye?
i'm just a plain man and nae dancing master; and i'm tryin to be as ceevil as it's morally possible.
as for that wild talk, it's fair disrepitable.
vitals, says you!
and where would i be with my blunderbush?"
he snarled.
""powder and your auld hands are but as the snail to the swallow against the bright steel in the hands of alan," said the other.
""before your jottering finger could find the trigger, the hilt would dirl on your breast-bane."
""eh, man, whae's denying it?"
said my uncle.
""pit it as ye please, hae" t your ain way; i'll do naething to cross ye.
just tell me what like ye'll be wanting, and ye'll see that we'll can agree fine."
""troth, sir," said alan, "i ask for nothing but plain dealing.
in two words: do ye want the lad killed or kept?"
""o, sirs!"
cried ebenezer.
""o, sirs, me!
that's no kind of language!"
""killed or kept!"
repeated alan.
""o, keepit, keepit!"
wailed my uncle.
""we'll have nae bloodshed, if you please."
""well," says alan, "as ye please; that'll be the dearer."
""the dearer?"
cries ebenezer.
""would ye fyle your hands wi" crime?"
""hoot!"
said alan, "they're baith crime, whatever!
and the killing's easier, and quicker, and surer.
keeping the lad'll be a fashious * job, a fashious, kittle business."
* troublesome.
""i'll have him keepit, though," returned my uncle.
""i never had naething to do with onything morally wrong; and i'm no gaun to begin to pleasure a wild hielandman."
""ye're unco scrupulous," sneered alan.
""i'm a man o" principle," said ebenezer, simply; "and if i have to pay for it, i'll have to pay for it.
and besides," says he, "ye forget the lad's my brother's son."
""well, well," said alan, "and now about the price.
it's no very easy for me to set a name upon it; i would first have to ken some small matters.
i would have to ken, for instance, what ye gave hoseason at the first off-go?"
""hoseason!"
cries my uncle, struck aback.
""what for?"
""for kidnapping david," says alan.
""it's a lee, it's a black lee!"
cried my uncle.
""he was never kidnapped.
he leed in his throat that tauld ye that.
kidnapped?
he never was!"
""that's no fault of mine nor yet of yours," said alan; "nor yet of hoseason's, if he's a man that can be trusted."
""what do ye mean?"
cried ebenezer.
""did hoseason tell ye?"
""why, ye donnered auld runt, how else would i ken?"
cried alan.
""hoseason and me are partners; we gang shares; so ye can see for yoursel" what good ye can do leeing.
and i must plainly say ye drove a fool's bargain when ye let a man like the sailor-man so far forward in your private matters.
but that's past praying for; and ye must lie on your bed the way ye made it.
and the point in hand is just this: what did ye pay him?"
""has he tauld ye himsel"?"
asked my uncle.
""that's my concern," said alan.
""weel," said my uncle, "i dinnae care what he said, he leed, and the solemn god's truth is this, that i gave him twenty pound.
but i'll be perfec "ly honest with ye: forby that, he was to have the selling of the lad in caroliny, whilk would be as muckle mair, but no from my pocket, ye see."
""thank you, mr. thomson.
that will do excellently well," said the lawyer, stepping forward; and then mighty civilly, "good-evening, mr. balfour," said he.
and, "good-evening, uncle ebenezer," said i. and, "it's a braw nicht, mr. balfour," added torrance.
never a word said my uncle, neither black nor white; but just sat where he was on the top door-step and stared upon us like a man turned to stone.
alan filched away his blunderbuss; and the lawyer, taking him by the arm, plucked him up from the doorstep, led him into the kitchen, whither we all followed, and set him down in a chair beside the hearth, where the fire was out and only a rush-light burning.
there we all looked upon him for a while, exulting greatly in our success, but yet with a sort of pity for the man's shame.
""come, come, mr. ebenezer," said the lawyer, "you must not be down-hearted, for i promise you we shall make easy terms.
in the meanwhile give us the cellar key, and torrance shall draw us a bottle of your father's wine in honour of the event."
then, turning to me and taking me by the hand, "mr. david," says he, "i wish you all joy in your good fortune, which i believe to be deserved."
and then to alan, with a spice of drollery, "mr. thomson, i pay you my compliment; it was most artfully conducted; but in one point you somewhat outran my comprehension.
do i understand your name to be james?
or charles?
or is it george, perhaps?"
""and why should it be any of the three, sir?"
quoth alan, drawing himself up, like one who smelt an offence.
""only, sir, that you mentioned a king's name," replied rankeillor; "and as there has never yet been a king thomson, or his fame at least has never come my way, i judged you must refer to that you had in baptism."
this was just the stab that alan would feel keenest, and i am free to confess he took it very ill.
not a word would he answer, but stepped off to the far end of the kitchen, and sat down and sulked; and it was not till i stepped after him, and gave him my hand, and thanked him by title as the chief spring of my success, that he began to smile a bit, and was at last prevailed upon to join our party.
by that time we had the fire lighted, and a bottle of wine uncorked; a good supper came out of the basket, to which torrance and i and alan set ourselves down; while the lawyer and my uncle passed into the next chamber to consult.
they stayed there closeted about an hour; at the end of which period they had come to a good understanding, and my uncle and i set our hands to the agreement in a formal manner.
by the terms of this, my uncle bound himself to satisfy rankeillor as to his intromissions, and to pay me two clear thirds of the yearly income of shaws.
so the beggar in the ballad had come home; and when i lay down that night on the kitchen chests, i was a man of means and had a name in the country.
alan and torrance and rankeillor slept and snored on their hard beds; but for me who had lain out under heaven and upon dirt and stones, so many days and nights, and often with an empty belly, and in fear of death, this good change in my case unmanned me more than any of the former evil ones; and i lay till dawn, looking at the fire on the roof and planning the future.
chapter xxx good-bye so far as i was concerned myself, i had come to port; but i had still alan, to whom i was so much beholden, on my hands; and i felt besides a heavy charge in the matter of the murder and james of the glens.
on both these heads i unbosomed to rankeillor the next morning, walking to and fro about six of the clock before the house of shaws, and with nothing in view but the fields and woods that had been my ancestors" and were now mine.
even as i spoke on these grave subjects, my eye would take a glad bit of a run over the prospect, and my heart jump with pride.
about my clear duty to my friend, the lawyer had no doubt.
i must help him out of the county at whatever risk; but in the case of james, he was of a different mind.
""mr. thomson," says he, "is one thing, mr. thomson's kinsman quite another.
i know little of the facts, but i gather that a great noble -lrb- whom we will call, if you like, the d. of a. -rrb- * has some concern and is even supposed to feel some animosity in the matter.
the d. of a. is doubtless an excellent nobleman; but, mr. david, timeo qui nocuere deos.
if you interfere to balk his vengeance, you should remember there is one way to shut your testimony out; and that is to put you in the dock.
there, you would be in the same pickle as mr. thomson's kinsman.
you will object that you are innocent; well, but so is he.
and to be tried for your life before a highland jury, on a highland quarrel and with a highland judge upon the bench, would be a brief transition to the gallows."
* the duke of argyle.
now i had made all these reasonings before and found no very good reply to them; so i put on all the simplicity i could.
""in that case, sir," said i, "i would just have to be hanged -- would i not?"
""my dear boy," cries he, "go in god's name, and do what you think is right.
it is a poor thought that at my time of life i should be advising you to choose the safe and shameful; and i take it back with an apology.
go and do your duty; and be hanged, if you must, like a gentleman.
there are worse things in the world than to be hanged."
""not many, sir," said i, smiling.
""why, yes, sir," he cried, "very many.
and it would be ten times better for your uncle -lrb- to go no farther afield -rrb- if he were dangling decently upon a gibbet."
thereupon he turned into the house -lrb- still in a great fervour of mind, so that i saw i had pleased him heartily -rrb- and there he wrote me two letters, making his comments on them as he wrote.
""this," says he, "is to my bankers, the british linen company, placing a credit to your name.
consult mr. thomson, he will know of ways; and you, with this credit, can supply the means.
i trust you will be a good husband of your money; but in the affair of a friend like mr. thomson, i would be even prodigal.
then for his kinsman, there is no better way than that you should seek the advocate, tell him your tale, and offer testimony; whether he may take it or not, is quite another matter, and will turn on the d. of a. now, that you may reach the lord advocate well recommended, i give you here a letter to a namesake of your own, the learned mr. balfour of pilrig, a man whom i esteem.
it will look better that you should be presented by one of your own name; and the laird of pilrig is much looked up to in the faculty and stands well with lord advocate grant.
i would not trouble him, if i were you, with any particulars; and -lrb- do you know? -rrb-
i think it would be needless to refer to mr. thomson.
form yourself upon the laird, he is a good model; when you deal with the advocate, be discreet; and in all these matters, may the lord guide you, mr. david!"
thereupon he took his farewell, and set out with torrance for the ferry, while alan and i turned our faces for the city of edinburgh.
as we went by the footpath and beside the gateposts and the unfinished lodge, we kept looking back at the house of my fathers.
it stood there, bare and great and smokeless, like a place not lived in; only in one of the top windows, there was the peak of a nightcap bobbing up and down and back and forward, like the head of a rabbit from a burrow.
i had little welcome when i came, and less kindness while i stayed; but at least i was watched as i went away.
alan and i went slowly forward upon our way, having little heart either to walk or speak.
the same thought was uppermost in both, that we were near the time of our parting; and remembrance of all the bygone days sate upon us sorely.
we talked indeed of what should be done; and it was resolved that alan should keep to the county, biding now here, now there, but coming once in the day to a particular place where i might be able to communicate with him, either in my own person or by messenger.
in the meanwhile, i was to seek out a lawyer, who was an appin stewart, and a man therefore to be wholly trusted; and it should be his part to find a ship and to arrange for alan's safe embarkation.
no sooner was this business done, than the words seemed to leave us; and though i would seek to jest with alan under the name of mr. thomson, and he with me on my new clothes and my estate, you could feel very well that we were nearer tears than laughter.
we came the by-way over the hill of corstorphine; and when we got near to the place called rest-and-be-thankful, and looked down on corstorphine bogs and over to the city and the castle on the hill, we both stopped, for we both knew without a word said that we had come to where our ways parted.
here he repeated to me once again what had been agreed upon between us: the address of the lawyer, the daily hour at which alan might be found, and the signals that were to be made by any that came seeking him.
then i gave what money i had -lrb- a guinea or two of rankeillor's -rrb- so that he should not starve in the meanwhile; and then we stood a space, and looked over at edinburgh in silence.
""well, good-bye," said alan, and held out his left hand.
""good-bye," said i, and gave the hand a little grasp, and went off down hill.
neither one of us looked the other in the face, nor so long as he was in my view did i take one back glance at the friend i was leaving.
but as i went on my way to the city, i felt so lost and lonesome, that i could have found it in my heart to sit down by the dyke, and cry and weep like any baby.
it was coming near noon when i passed in by the west kirk and the grassmarket into the streets of the capital.
the huge height of the buildings, running up to ten and fifteen storeys, the narrow arched entries that continually vomited passengers, the wares of the merchants in their windows, the hubbub and endless stir, the foul smells and the fine clothes, and a hundred other particulars too small to mention, struck me into a kind of stupor of surprise, so that i let the crowd carry me to and fro; and yet all the time what i was thinking of was alan at rest-and-be-thankful; and all the time -lrb- although you would think i would not choose but be delighted with these braws and novelties -rrb- there was a cold gnawing in my inside like a remorse for something wrong.
_book_title_: robert_louis_stevenson___the_black_arrow.txt.out
prologue -- john amend-all on a certain afternoon, in the late springtime, the bell upon tunstall moat house was heard ringing at an unaccustomed hour.
far and near, in the forest and in the fields along the river, people began to desert their labours and hurry towards the sound; and in tunstall hamlet a group of poor country-folk stood wondering at the summons.
tunstall hamlet at that period, in the reign of old king henry vi., wore much the same appearance as it wears to-day.
a score or so of houses, heavily framed with oak, stood scattered in a long green valley ascending from the river.
at the foot, the road crossed a bridge, and mounting on the other side, disappeared into the fringes of the forest on its way to the moat house, and further forth to holywood abbey.
half-way up the village, the church stood among yews.
on every side the slopes were crowned and the view bounded by the green elms and greening oak-trees of the forest.
hard by the bridge, there was a stone cross upon a knoll, and here the group had collected -- half a dozen women and one tall fellow in a russet smock -- discussing what the bell betided.
an express had gone through the hamlet half an hour before, and drunk a pot of ale in the saddle, not daring to dismount for the hurry of his errand; but he had been ignorant himself of what was forward, and only bore sealed letters from sir daniel brackley to sir oliver oates, the parson, who kept the moat house in the master's absence.
but now there was the noise of a horse; and soon, out of the edge of the wood and over the echoing bridge, there rode up young master richard shelton, sir daniel's ward.
he, at the least, would know, and they hailed him and begged him to explain.
he drew bridle willingly enough -- a young fellow not yet eighteen, sun-browned and grey-eyed, in a jacket of deer's leather, with a black velvet collar, a green hood upon his head, and a steel cross-bow at his back.
the express, it appeared, had brought great news.
a battle was impending.
sir daniel had sent for every man that could draw a bow or carry a bill to go post-haste to kettley, under pain of his severe displeasure; but for whom they were to fight, or of where the battle was expected, dick knew nothing.
sir oliver would come shortly himself, and bennet hatch was arming at that moment, for he it was who should lead the party.
""it is the ruin of this kind land," a woman said.
""if the barons live at war, ploughfolk must eat roots."
""nay," said dick, "every man that follows shall have sixpence a day, and archers twelve."
""if they live," returned the woman, "that may very well be; but how if they die, my master?"
""they can not better die than for their natural lord," said dick.
""no natural lord of mine," said the man in the smock.
""i followed the walsinghams; so we all did down brierly way, till two years ago, come candlemas.
and now i must side with brackley!
it was the law that did it; call ye that natural?
but now, what with sir daniel and what with sir oliver -- that knows more of law than honesty -- i have no natural lord but poor king harry the sixt, god bless him!
-- the poor innocent that can not tell his right hand from his left."
""ye speak with an ill tongue, friend," answered dick, "to miscall your good master and my lord the king in the same libel.
but king harry -- praised be the saints!
-- has come again into his right mind, and will have all things peaceably ordained.
and as for sir daniel, y" are very brave behind his back.
but i will be no tale-bearer; and let that suffice."
""i say no harm of you, master richard," returned the peasant.
""y" are a lad; but when ye come to a man's inches, ye will find ye have an empty pocket.
i say no more: the saints help sir daniel's neighbours, and the blessed maid protect his wards!"
""clipsby," said richard, "you speak what i can not hear with honour.
sir daniel is my good master, and my guardian."
""come, now, will ye read me a riddle?"
returned clipsby.
""on whose side is sir daniel?"
""i know not," said dick, colouring a little; for his guardian had changed sides continually in the troubles of that period, and every change had brought him some increase of fortune.
""ay," returned clipsby, "you, nor no man.
for, indeed, he is one that goes to bed lancaster and gets up york."
just then the bridge rang under horse-shoe iron, and the party turned and saw bennet hatch come galloping -- a brown-faced, grizzled fellow, heavy of hand and grim of mien, armed with sword and spear, a steel salet on his head, a leather jack upon his body.
he was a great man in these parts; sir daniel's right hand in peace and war, and at that time, by his master's interest, bailiff of the hundred.
""clipsby," he shouted, "off to the moat house, and send all other laggards the same gate.
bowyer will give you jack and salet.
we must ride before curfew.
look to it: he that is last at the lych-gate sir daniel shall reward.
look to it right well!
i know you for a man of naught.
nance," he added, to one of the women, "is old appleyard up town?"
""i'll warrant you," replied the woman.
""in his field, for sure."
so the group dispersed, and while clipsby walked leisurely over the bridge, bennet and young shelton rode up the road together, through the village and past the church.
""ye will see the old shrew," said bennet.
""he will waste more time grumbling and prating of harry the fift than would serve a man to shoe a horse.
and all because he has been to the french wars!"
the house to which they were bound was the last in the village, standing alone among lilacs; and beyond it, on three sides, there was open meadow rising towards the borders of the wood.
hatch dismounted, threw his rein over the fence, and walked down the field, dick keeping close at his elbow, to where the old soldier was digging, knee-deep in his cabbages, and now and again, in a cracked voice, singing a snatch of song.
he was all dressed in leather, only his hood and tippet were of black frieze, and tied with scarlet; his face was like a walnut-shell, both for colour and wrinkles; but his old grey eye was still clear enough, and his sight unabated.
perhaps he was deaf; perhaps he thought it unworthy of an old archer of agincourt to pay any heed to such disturbances; but neither the surly notes of the alarm bell, nor the near approach of bennet and the lad, appeared at all to move him; and he continued obstinately digging, and piped up, very thin and shaky: "now, dear lady, if thy will be, i pray you that you will rue on me."
""nick appleyard," said hatch, "sir oliver commends him to you, and bids that ye shall come within this hour to the moat house, there to take command."
the old fellow looked up.
""save you, my masters!"
he said, grinning.
""and where goeth master hatch?"
""master hatch is off to kettley, with every man that we can horse," returned bennet.
""there is a fight toward, it seems, and my lord stays a reinforcement."
""ay, verily," returned appleyard.
""and what will ye leave me to garrison withal?"
""i leave you six good men, and sir oliver to boot," answered hatch.
""it'll not hold the place," said appleyard; "the number sufficeth not.
it would take two score to make it good."
""why, it's for that we came to you, old shrew!"
replied the other.
""who else is there but you that could do aught in such a house with such a garrison?"
""ay!
when the pinch comes, ye remember the old shoe," returned nick.
""there is not a man of you can back a horse or hold a bill; and as for archery -- st. michael!
if old harry the fift were back again, he would stand and let ye shoot at him for a farthen a shoot!"
""nay, nick, there's some can draw a good bow yet," said bennet.
""draw a good bow!"
cried appleyard.
""yes!
but who'll shoot me a good shoot?
it's there the eye comes in, and the head between your shoulders.
now, what might you call a long shoot, bennet hatch?"
""well," said bennet, looking about him, "it would be a long shoot from here into the forest."
""ay, it would be a longish shoot," said the old fellow, turning to look over his shoulder; and then he put up his hand over his eyes, and stood staring.
""why, what are you looking at?"
asked bennet, with a chuckle.
""do, you see harry the fift?"
the veteran continued looking up the hill in silence.
the sun shone broadly over the shelving meadows; a few white sheep wandered browsing; all was still but the distant jangle of the bell.
""what is it, appleyard?"
asked dick.
""why, the birds," said appleyard.
and, sure enough, over the top of the forest, where it ran down in a tongue among the meadows, and ended in a pair of goodly green elms, about a bowshot from the field where they were standing, a flight of birds was skimming to and fro, in evident disorder.
""what of the birds?"
said bennet.
""ay!"
returned appleyard, "y" are a wise man to go to war, master bennet.
birds are a good sentry; in forest places they be the first line of battle.
look you, now, if we lay here in camp, there might be archers skulking down to get the wind of us; and here would you be, none the wiser!"
""why, old shrew," said hatch, "there be no men nearer us than sir daniel's, at kettley; y" are as safe as in london tower; and ye raise scares upon a man for a few chaffinches and sparrows!"
""hear him!"
grinned appleyard.
""how many a rogue would give his two crop ears to have a shoot at either of us?
saint michael, man!
they hate us like two polecats!"
""well, sooth it is, they hate sir daniel," answered hatch, a little sobered.
""ay, they hate sir daniel, and they hate every man that serves with him," said appleyard; "and in the first order of hating, they hate bennet hatch and old nicholas the bowman.
see ye here: if there was a stout fellow yonder in the wood-edge, and you and i stood fair for him -- as, by saint george, we stand!
-- which, think ye, would he choose?"
""you, for a good wager," answered hatch.
""my surcoat to a leather belt, it would be you!"
cried the old archer.
""ye burned grimstone, bennet -- they'll ne'er forgive you that, my master.
and as for me, i'll soon be in a good place, god grant, and out of bow-shoot -- ay, and cannon-shoot -- of all their malices.
i am an old man, and draw fast to homeward, where the bed is ready.
but for you, bennet, y" are to remain behind here at your own peril, and if ye come to my years unhanged, the old true-blue english spirit will be dead."
""y" are the shrewishest old dolt in tunstall forest," returned hatch, visibly ruffled by these threats.
""get ye to your arms before sir oliver come, and leave prating for one good while.
an ye had talked so much with harry the fift, his ears would ha" been richer than his pocket."
an arrow sang in the air, like a huge hornet; it struck old appleyard between the shoulder-blades, and pierced him clean through, and he fell forward on his face among the cabbages.
hatch, with a broken cry, leapt into the air; then, stooping double, he ran for the cover of the house.
and in the meanwhile dick shelton had dropped behind a lilac, and had his crossbow bent and shouldered, covering the point of the forest.
not a leaf stirred.
the sheep were patiently browsing; the birds had settled.
but there lay the old man, with a cloth-yard arrow standing in his back; and there were hatch holding to the gable, and dick crouching and ready behind the lilac bush.
""d'ye see aught?"
cried hatch.
""not a twig stirs," said dick.
""i think shame to leave him lying," said bennet, coming forward once more with hesitating steps and a very pale countenance.
""keep a good eye on the wood, master shelton -- keep a clear eye on the wood.
the saints assoil us!
here was a good shoot!"
bennet raised the old archer on his knee.
he was not yet dead; his face worked, and his eyes shut and opened like machinery, and he had a most horrible, ugly look of one in pain.
""can ye hear, old nick?"
asked hatch.
""have ye a last wish before ye wend, old brother?"
""pluck out the shaft, and let me pass, a" mary's name!"
gasped appleyard.
""i be done with old england.
pluck it out!"
""master dick," said bennet, "come hither, and pull me a good pull upon the arrow.
he would fain pass, the poor sinner."
dick laid down his cross-bow, and pulling hard upon the arrow, drew it forth.
a gush of blood followed; the old archer scrambled half upon his feet, called once upon the name of god, and then fell dead.
hatch, upon his knees among the cabbages, prayed fervently for the welfare of the passing spirit.
but even as he prayed, it was plain that his mind was still divided, and he kept ever an eye upon the corner of the wood from which the shot had come.
when he had done, he got to his feet again, drew off one of his mailed gauntlets, and wiped his pale face, which was all wet with terror.
""ay," he said, "it'll be my turn next."
""who hath done this, bennet?"
richard asked, still holding the arrow in his hand.
""nay, the saints know," said hatch.
""here are a good two score christian souls that we have hunted out of house and holding, he and i.
he has paid his shot, poor shrew, nor will it be long, mayhap, ere i pay mine.
sir daniel driveth over-hard."
""this is a strange shaft," said the lad, looking at the arrow in his hand.
""ay, by my faith!"
cried bennet.
""black, and black-feathered.
here is an ill-favoured shaft, by my sooth!
for black, they say, bodes burial.
and here be words written.
wipe the blood away.
what read ye?"""
appulyaird fro jon amend-all,"" read shelton.
""what should this betoken?"
""nay, i like it not," returned the retainer, shaking his head.
""john amend-all!
here is a rogue's name for those that be up in the world!
but why stand we here to make a mark?
take him by the knees, good master shelton, while i lift him by the shoulders, and let us lay him in his house.
this will be a rare shog to poor sir oliver; he will turn paper colour; he will pray like a windmill."
they took up the old archer, and carried him between them into his house, where he had dwelt alone.
and there they laid him on the floor, out of regard for the mattress, and sought, as best they might, to straighten and compose his limbs.
appleyard's house was clean and bare.
there was a bed, with a blue cover, a cupboard, a great chest, a pair of joint-stools, a hinged table in the chimney corner, and hung upon the wall the old soldier's armoury of bows and defensive armour.
hatch began to look about him curiously.
""nick had money," he said.
""he may have had three score pounds put by.
i would i could light upo n't!
when ye lose an old friend, master richard, the best consolation is to heir him.
see, now, this chest.
i would go a mighty wager there is a bushel of gold therein.
he had a strong hand to get, and a hard hand to keep withal, had appleyard the archer.
now may god rest his spirit!
near eighty year he was afoot and about, and ever getting; but now he's on the broad of his back, poor shrew, and no more lacketh; and if his chattels came to a good friend, he would be merrier, methinks, in heaven."
""come, hatch," said dick, "respect his stone-blind eyes.
would ye rob the man before his body?
nay, he would walk!"
hatch made several signs of the cross; but by this time his natural complexion had returned, and he was not easily to be dashed from any purpose.
it would have gone hard with the chest had not the gate sounded, and presently after the door of the house opened and admitted a tall, portly, ruddy, black-eyed man of near fifty, in a surplice and black robe.
""appleyard" -- the newcomer was saying, as he entered; but he stopped dead.
""ave maria!"
he cried.
""saints be our shield!
what cheer is this?"
""cold cheer with appleyard, sir parson," answered hatch, with perfect cheerfulness.
""shot at his own door, and alighteth even now at purgatory gates.
ay!
there, if tales be true, he shall lack neither coal nor candle."
sir oliver groped his way to a joint-stool, and sat down upon it, sick and white.
""this is a judgment!
o, a great stroke!"
he sobbed, and rattled off a leash of prayers.
hatch meanwhile reverently doffed his salet and knelt down.
""ay, bennet," said the priest, somewhat recovering, "and what may this be?
what enemy hath done this?"
""here, sir oliver, is the arrow.
see, it is written upon with words," said dick.
""nay," cried the priest, "this is a foul hearing!
john amend-all!
a right lollardy word.
and black of hue, as for an omen!
sirs, this knave arrow likes me not.
but it importeth rather to take counsel.
who should this be?
bethink you, bennet.
of so many black ill-willers, which should he be that doth so hardily outface us?
simnel?
i do much question it.
the walsinghams?
nay, they are not yet so broken; they still think to have the law over us, when times change.
there was simon malmesbury, too.
how think ye, bennet?"
""what think ye, sir," returned hatch, "of ellis duckworth?"
""nay, bennet, never.
nay, not he," said the priest.
""there cometh never any rising, bennet, from below -- so all judicious chroniclers concord in their opinion; but rebellion travelleth ever downward from above; and when dick, tom, and harry take them to their bills, look ever narrowly to see what lord is profited thereby.
now, sir daniel, having once more joined him to the queen's party, is in ill odour with the yorkist lords.
thence, bennet, comes the blow -- by what procuring, i yet seek; but therein lies the nerve of this discomfiture."
""a n't please you, sir oliver," said bennet, "the axles are so hot in this country that i have long been smelling fire.
so did this poor sinner, appleyard.
and, by your leave, men's spirits are so foully inclined to all of us, that it needs neither york nor lancaster to spur them on.
hear my plain thoughts: you, that are a clerk, and sir daniel, that sails on any wind, ye have taken many men's goods, and beaten and hanged not a few.
y" are called to count for this; in the end, i wot not how, ye have ever the uppermost at law, and ye think all patched.
but give me leave, sir oliver: the man that ye have dispossessed and beaten is but the angrier, and some day, when the black devil is by, he will up with his bow and clout me a yard of arrow through your inwards."
""nay, bennet, y" are in the wrong.
bennet, ye should be glad to be corrected," said sir oliver.
""y" are a prater, bennet, a talker, a babbler; your mouth is wider than your two ears.
mend it, bennet, mend it."
""nay, i say no more.
have it as ye list," said the retainer.
the priest now rose from the stool, and from the writing-case that hung about his neck took forth wax and a taper, and a flint and steel.
with these he sealed up the chest and the cupboard with sir daniel's arms, hatch looking on disconsolate; and then the whole party proceeded, somewhat timorously, to sally from the house and get to horse."
't is time we were on the road, sir oliver," said hatch, as he held the priest's stirrup while he mounted.
""ay; but, bennet, things are changed," returned the parson.
""there is now no appleyard -- rest his soul!
-- to keep the garrison.
i shall keep you, bennet.
i must have a good man to rest me on in this day of black arrows.
"the arrow that flieth by day," saith the evangel; i have no mind of the context; nay, i am a sluggard priest, i am too deep in men's affairs.
well, let us ride forth, master hatch.
the jackmen should be at the church by now."
so they rode forward down the road, with the wind after them, blowing the tails of the parson's cloak; and behind them, as they went, clouds began to arise and blot out the sinking sun.
they had passed three of the scattered houses that make up tunstall hamlet, when, coming to a turn, they saw the church before them.
ten or a dozen houses clustered immediately round it; but to the back the churchyard was next the meadows.
at the lych-gate, near a score of men were gathered, some in the saddle, some standing by their horses" heads.
they were variously armed and mounted; some with spears, some with bills, some with bows, and some bestriding plough-horses, still splashed with the mire of the furrow; for these were the very dregs of the country, and all the better men and the fair equipments were already with sir daniel in the field.
""we have not done amiss, praised be the cross of holywood!
sir daniel will be right well content," observed the priest, inwardly numbering the troop.
""who goes?
stand!
if ye be true!"
shouted bennet.
a man was seen slipping through the churchyard among the yews; and at the sound of this summons he discarded all concealment, and fairly took to his heels for the forest.
the men at the gate, who had been hitherto unaware of the stranger's presence, woke and scattered.
those who had dismounted began scrambling into the saddle; the rest rode in pursuit; but they had to make the circuit of the consecrated ground, and it was plain their quarry would escape them.
hatch, roaring an oath, put his horse at the hedge, to head him off; but the beast refused, and sent his rider sprawling in the dust.
and though he was up again in a moment, and had caught the bridle, the time had gone by, and the fugitive had gained too great a lead for any hope of capture.
the wisest of all had been dick shelton.
instead of starting in a vain pursuit, he had whipped his crossbow from his back, bent it, and set a quarrel to the string; and now, when the others had desisted, he turned to bennet and asked if he should shoot.
""shoot!
shoot!"
cried the priest, with sanguinary violence.
""cover him, master dick," said bennet.
""bring me him down like a ripe apple."
the fugitive was now within but a few leaps of safety; but this last part of the meadow ran very steeply uphill; and the man ran slower in proportion.
what with the greyness of the falling night, and the uneven movements of the runner, it was no easy aim; and as dick levelled his bow, he felt a kind of pity, and a half desire that he might miss.
the quarrel sped.
the man stumbled and fell, and a great cheer arose from hatch and the pursuers.
but they were counting their corn before the harvest.
the man fell lightly; he was lightly afoot again, turned and waved his cap in a bravado, and was out of sight next moment in the margin of the wood.
""and the plague go with him!"
cried bennet.
""he has thieves" heels; he can run, by st banbury!
but you touched him, master shelton; he has stolen your quarrel, may he never have good i grudge him less!"
""nay, but what made he by the church?"
asked sir oliver.
""i am shrewdly afeared there has been mischief here.
clipsby, good fellow, get ye down from your horse, and search thoroughly among the yews."
clipsby was gone but a little while ere he returned carrying a paper.
""this writing was pinned to the church door," he said, handing it to the parson.
""i found naught else, sir parson."
""now, by the power of mother church," cried sir oliver, "but this runs hard on sacrilege!
for the king's good pleasure, or the lord of the manor -- well!
but that every run-the-hedge in a green jerkin should fasten papers to the chancel door -- nay, it runs hard on sacrilege, hard; and men have burned for matters of less weight.
but what have we here?
the light falls apace.
good master richard, y" have young eyes.
read me, i pray, this libel."
dick shelton took the paper in his hand and read it aloud.
it contained some lines of very rugged doggerel, hardly even rhyming, written in a gross character, and most uncouthly spelt.
with the spelling somewhat bettered, this is how they ran: "i had four blak arrows under my belt, four for the greefs that i have felt, four for the nomber of ill menne that have opressid me now and then.
one is gone; one is wele sped; old apulyaird is ded.
one is for maister bennet hatch, that burned grimstone, walls and thatch.
one for sir oliver oates, that cut sir harry shelton's throat.
sir daniel, ye shull have the fourt; we shall think it fair sport.
ye shull each have your own part, a blak arrow in each blak heart.
get ye to your knees for to pray: ye are ded theeves, by yea and nay!
""jon amend-all of the green wood, and his jolly fellaweship.
""item, we have mo arrowes and goode hempen cord for otheres of your following."
""now, well-a-day for charity and the christian graces!"
cried sir oliver, lamentably.
""sirs, this is an ill world, and groweth daily worse.
i will swear upon the cross of holywood i am as innocent of that good knight's hurt, whether in act or purpose, as the babe unchristened.
neither was his throat cut; for therein they are again in error, as there still live credible witnesses to show."
""it boots not, sir parson," said bennet.
""here is unseasonable talk."
""nay, master bennet, not so.
keep ye in your due place, good bennet," answered the priest.
""i shall make mine innocence appear.
i will, upon no consideration, lose my poor life in error.
i take all men to witness that i am clear of this matter.
i was not even in the moat house.
i was sent of an errand before nine upon the clock" -- "sir oliver," said hatch, interrupting, "since it please you not to stop this sermon, i will take other means.
goffe, sound to horse."
and while the tucket was sounding, bennet moved close to the bewildered parson, and whispered violently in his ear.
dick shelton saw the priest's eye turned upon him for an instant in a startled glance.
he had some cause for thought; for this sir harry shelton was his own natural father.
but he said never a word, and kept his countenance unmoved.
hatch and sir oliver discussed together for a while their altered situation; ten men, it was decided between them, should be reserved, not only to garrison the moat house, but to escort the priest across the wood.
in the meantime, as bennet was to remain behind, the command of the reinforcement was given to master shelton.
indeed, there was no choice; the men were loutish fellows, dull and unskilled in war, while dick was not only popular, but resolute and grave beyond his age.
although his youth had been spent in these rough, country places, the lad had been well taught in letters by sir oliver, and hatch himself had shown him the management of arms and the first principles of command.
bennet had always been kind and helpful; he was one of those who are cruel as the grave to those they call their enemies, but ruggedly faithful and well willing to their friends; and now, while sir oliver entered the next house to write, in his swift, exquisite penmanship, a memorandum of the last occurrences to his master, sir daniel brackley, bennet came up to his pupil to wish him god-speed upon his enterprise.
""ye must go the long way about, master shelton," he said; "round by the bridge, for your life!
keep a sure man fifty paces afore you, to draw shots; and go softly till y" are past the wood.
if the rogues fall upon you, ride for "t; ye will do naught by standing.
and keep ever forward, master shelton; turn me not back again, an ye love your life; there is no help in tunstall, mind ye that.
and now, since ye go to the great wars about the king, and i continue to dwell here in extreme jeopardy of my life, and the saints alone can certify if we shall meet again below, i give you my last counsels now at your riding.
keep an eye on sir daniel; he is unsure.
put not your trust in the jack-priest; he intendeth not amiss, but doth the will of others; it is a hand-gun for sir daniel!
get your good lordship where ye go; make you strong friends; look to it.
and think ever a pater-noster-while on bennet hatch.
there are worse rogues afoot than bennet.
so, god-speed!"
""and heaven be with you, bennet!"
returned dick.
""ye were a good friend to me-ward, and so i shall say ever."
""and, look ye, master," added hatch, with a certain embarrassment, "if this amend-all should get a shaft into me, ye might, mayhap, lay out a gold mark or mayhap a pound for my poor soul; for it is like to go stiff with me in purgatory."
""ye shall have your will of it, bennet," answered dick.
""but, what cheer, man!
we shall meet again, where ye shall have more need of ale than masses."
""the saints so grant it, master dick!"
returned the other.
""but here comes sir oliver.
an he were as quick with the long-bow as with the pen, he would be a brave man-at-arms."
sir oliver gave dick a sealed packet, with this superscription: "to my ryght worchypful master, sir daniel brackley, knyght, be thys delyvered in haste."
and dick, putting it in the bosom of his jacket, gave the word and set forth westward up the village.
book i -- the two lads chapter i -- at the sign of the sun in kettley sir daniel and his men lay in and about kettley that night, warmly quartered and well patrolled.
but the knight of tunstall was one who never rested from money-getting; and even now, when he was on the brink of an adventure which should make or mar him, he was up an hour after midnight to squeeze poor neighbours.
he was one who trafficked greatly in disputed inheritances; it was his way to buy out the most unlikely claimant, and then, by the favour he curried with great lords about the king, procure unjust decisions in his favour; or, if that was too roundabout, to seize the disputed manor by force of arms, and rely on his influence and sir oliver's cunning in the law to hold what he had snatched.
kettley was one such place; it had come very lately into his clutches; he still met with opposition from the tenants; and it was to overawe discontent that he had led his troops that way.
by two in the morning, sir daniel sat in the inn room, close by the fireside, for it was cold at that hour among the fens of kettley.
by his elbow stood a pottle of spiced ale.
he had taken off his visored headpiece, and sat with his bald head and thin, dark visage resting on one hand, wrapped warmly in a sanguine-coloured cloak.
at the lower end of the room about a dozen of his men stood sentry over the door or lay asleep on benches; and somewhat nearer hand, a young lad, apparently of twelve or thirteen, was stretched in a mantle on the floor.
the host of the sun stood before the great man.
""now, mark me, mine host," sir daniel said, "follow but mine orders, and i shall be your good lord ever.
i must have good men for head boroughs, and i will have adam-a-more high constable; see to it narrowly.
if other men be chosen, it shall avail you nothing; rather it shall be found to your sore cost.
for those that have paid rent to walsingham i shall take good measure -- you among the rest, mine host."
""good knight," said the host, "i will swear upon the cross of holywood i did but pay to walsingham upon compulsion.
nay, bully knight, i love not the rogue walsinghams; they were as poor as thieves, bully knight.
give me a great lord like you.
nay; ask me among the neighbours, i am stout for brackley."
""it may be," said sir daniel, dryly.
""ye shall then pay twice."
the innkeeper made a horrid grimace; but this was a piece of bad luck that might readily befall a tenant in these unruly times, and he was perhaps glad to make his peace so easily.
""bring up yon fellow, selden!"
cried the knight.
and one of his retainers led up a poor, cringing old man, as pale as a candle, and all shaking with the fen fever.
""sirrah," said sir daniel, "your name?"
""a n't please your worship," replied the man, "my name is condall -- condall of shoreby, at your good worship's pleasure."
""i have heard you ill reported on," returned the knight.
""ye deal in treason, rogue; ye trudge the country leasing; y" are heavily suspicioned of the death of severals.
how, fellow, are ye so bold?
but i will bring you down."
""right honourable and my reverend lord," the man cried, "here is some hodge-podge, saving your good presence.
i am but a poor private man, and have hurt none."
""the under-sheriff did report of you most vilely," said the knight."
"seize me," saith he, "that tyndal of shoreby.""
""condall, my good lord; condall is my poor name," said the unfortunate.
""condall or tyndal, it is all one," replied sir daniel, coolly.
""for, by my sooth, y" are here and i do mightily suspect your honesty.
if ye would save your neck, write me swiftly an obligation for twenty pound."
""for twenty pound, my good lord!"
cried condall.
""here is midsummer madness!
my whole estate amounteth not to seventy shillings."
""condall or tyndal," returned sir daniel, grinning, "i will run my peril of that loss.
write me down twenty, and when i have recovered all i may, i will be good lord to you, and pardon you the rest."
""alas!
my good lord, it may not be; i have no skill to write," said condall.
""well-a-day!"
returned the knight.
""here, then, is no remedy.
yet i would fain have spared you, tyndal, had my conscience suffered.
selden, take me this old shrew softly to the nearest elm, and hang me him tenderly by the neck, where i may see him at my riding.
fare ye well, good master condall, dear master tyndal; y" are post-haste for paradise; fare ye then well!"
""nay, my right pleasant lord," replied condall, forcing an obsequious smile, "an ye be so masterful, as doth right well become you, i will even, with all my poor skill, do your good bidding."
""friend," quoth sir daniel, "ye will now write two score.
go to!
y" are too cunning for a livelihood of seventy shillings.
selden, see him write me this in good form, and have it duly witnessed."
and sir daniel, who was a very merry knight, none merrier in england, took a drink of his mulled ale, and lay back, smiling.
meanwhile, the boy upon the floor began to stir, and presently sat up and looked about him with a scare.
""hither," said sir daniel; and as the other rose at his command and came slowly towards him, he leaned back and laughed outright.
""by the rood!"
he cried, "a sturdy boy!"
the lad flushed crimson with anger, and darted a look of hate out of his dark eyes.
now that he was on his legs, it was more difficult to make certain of his age.
his face looked somewhat older in expression, but it was as smooth as a young child's; and in bone and body he was unusually slender, and somewhat awkward of gait.
""ye have called me, sir daniel," he said.
""was it to laugh at my poor plight?"
""nay, now, let laugh," said the knight.
""good shrew, let laugh, i pray you.
an ye could see yourself, i warrant ye would laugh the first."
""well," cried the lad, flushing, "ye shall answer this when ye answer for the other.
laugh while yet ye may!"
""nay, now, good cousin," replied sir daniel, with some earnestness, "think not that i mock at you, except in mirth, as between kinsfolk and singular friends.
i will make you a marriage of a thousand pounds, go to!
and cherish you exceedingly.
i took you, indeed, roughly, as the time demanded; but from henceforth i shall ungrudgingly maintain and cheerfully serve you.
ye shall be mrs. shelton -- lady shelton, by my troth!
for the lad promiseth bravely.
tut!
ye will not shy for honest laughter; it purgeth melancholy.
they are no rogues who laugh, good cousin.
good mine host, lay me a meal now for my cousin, master john.
sit ye down, sweetheart, and eat."
""nay," said master john, "i will break no bread.
since ye force me to this sin, i will fast for my soul's interest.
but, good mine host, i pray you of courtesy give me a cup of fair water; i shall be much beholden to your courtesy indeed."
""ye shall have a dispensation, go to!"
cried the knight.
""shalt be well shriven, by my faith!
content you, then, and eat."
but the lad was obstinate, drank a cup of water, and, once more wrapping himself closely in his mantle, sat in a far corner, brooding.
in an hour or two, there rose a stir in the village of sentries challenging and the clatter of arms and horses; and then a troop drew up by the inn door, and richard shelton, splashed with mud, presented himself upon the threshold.
""save you, sir daniel," he said.
""how!
dickie shelton!"
cried the knight; and at the mention of dick's name the other lad looked curiously across.
""what maketh bennet hatch?"
""please you, sir knight, to take cognisance of this packet from sir oliver, wherein are all things fully stated," answered richard, presenting the priest's letter.
""and please you farther, ye were best make all speed to risingham; for on the way hither we encountered one riding furiously with letters, and by his report, my lord of risingham was sore bested, and lacked exceedingly your presence."
""how say you?
sore bested?"
returned the knight.
""nay, then, we will make speed sitting down, good richard.
as the world goes in this poor realm of england, he that rides softliest rides surest.
delay, they say, begetteth peril; but it is rather this itch of doing that undoes men; mark it, dick.
but let me see, first, what cattle ye have brought.
selden, a link here at the door!"
and sir daniel strode forth into the village street, and, by the red glow of a torch, inspected his new troops.
he was an unpopular neighbour and an unpopular master; but as a leader in war he was well-beloved by those who rode behind his pennant.
his dash, his proved courage, his forethought for the soldiers" comfort, even his rough gibes, were all to the taste of the bold blades in jack and salet.
""nay, by the rood!"
he cried, "what poor dogs are these?
here be some as crooked as a bow, and some as lean as a spear.
friends, ye shall ride in the front of the battle; i can spare you, friends.
mark me this old villain on the piebald!
a two-year mutton riding on a hog would look more soldierly!
ha!
clipsby, are ye there, old rat?
y" are a man i could lose with a good heart; ye shall go in front of all, with a bull's eye painted on your jack, to be the better butt for archery; sirrah, ye shall show me the way."
""i will show you any way, sir daniel, but the way to change sides," returned clipsby, sturdily.
sir daniel laughed a guffaw.
""why, well said!"
he cried.
""hast a shrewd tongue in thy mouth, go to!
i will forgive you for that merry word.
selden, see them fed, both man and brute."
the knight re-entered the inn.
""now, friend dick," he said, "fall to.
here is good ale and bacon.
eat, while that i read."
sir daniel opened the packet, and as he read his brow darkened.
when he had done he sat a little, musing.
then he looked sharply at his ward.
""dick," said he, "y" have seen this penny rhyme?"
the lad replied in the affirmative.
""it bears your father's name," continued the knight; "and our poor shrew of a parson is, by some mad soul, accused of slaying him."
""he did most eagerly deny it," answered dick.
""he did?"
cried the knight, very sharply.
""heed him not.
he has a loose tongue; he babbles like a jack-sparrow.
some day, when i may find the leisure, dick, i will myself more fully inform you of these matters.
there was one duckworth shrewdly blamed for it; but the times were troubled, and there was no justice to be got."
""it befell at the moat house?"
dick ventured, with a beating at his heart.
""it befell between the moat house and holywood," replied sir daniel, calmly; but he shot a covert glance, black with suspicion, at dick's face.
""and now," added the knight, "speed you with your meal; ye shall return to tunstall with a line from me."
dick's face fell sorely.
""prithee, sir daniel," he cried, "send one of the villains!
i beseech you let me to the battle.
i can strike a stroke, i promise you."
""i misdoubt it not," replied sir daniel, sitting down to write.
""but here, dick, is no honour to be won.
i lie in kettley till i have sure tidings of the war, and then ride to join me with the conqueror.
cry not on cowardice; it is but wisdom, dick; for this poor realm so tosseth with rebellion, and the king's name and custody so changeth hands, that no man may be certain of the morrow.
toss-pot and shuttle-wit run in, but my lord good-counsel sits o" one side, waiting."
with that, sir daniel, turning his back to dick, and quite at the farther end of the long table, began to write his letter, with his mouth on one side, for this business of the black arrow stuck sorely in his throat.
meanwhile, young shelton was going on heartily enough with his breakfast, when he felt a touch upon his arm, and a very soft voice whispering in his ear.
""make not a sign, i do beseech you," said the voice, "but of your charity tell me the straight way to holywood.
beseech you, now, good boy, comfort a poor soul in peril and extreme distress, and set me so far forth upon the way to my repose."
""take the path by the windmill," answered dick, in the same tone; "it will bring you to till ferry; there inquire again."
and without turning his head, he fell again to eating.
but with the tail of his eye he caught a glimpse of the young lad called master john stealthily creeping from the room.
""why," thought dick, "he is a young as i. "good boy" doth he call me?
an i had known, i should have seen the varlet hanged ere i had told him.
well, if he goes through the fen, i may come up with him and pull his ears."
half an hour later, sir daniel gave dick the letter, and bade him speed to the moat house.
and, again, some half an hour after dick's departure, a messenger came, in hot haste, from my lord of risingham.
""sir daniel," the messenger said, "ye lose great honour, by my sooth!
the fight began again this morning ere the dawn, and we have beaten their van and scattered their right wing.
only the main battle standeth fast.
an we had your fresh men, we should tilt you them all into the river.
what, sir knight!
will ye be the last?
it stands not with your good credit."
""nay," cried the knight, "i was but now upon the march.
selden, sound me the tucket.
sir, i am with you on the instant.
it is not two hours since the more part of my command came in, sir messenger.
what would ye have?
spurring is good meat, but yet it killed the charger.
bustle, boys!"
by this time the tucket was sounding cheerily in the morning, and from all sides sir daniel's men poured into the main street and formed before the inn.
they had slept upon their arms, with chargers saddled, and in ten minutes five-score men-at-arms and archers, cleanly equipped and briskly disciplined, stood ranked and ready.
the chief part were in sir daniel's livery, murrey and blue, which gave the greater show to their array.
the best armed rode first; and away out of sight, at the tail of the column, came the sorry reinforcement of the night before.
sir daniel looked with pride along the line.
""here be the lads to serve you in a pinch," he said.
""they are pretty men, indeed," replied the messenger.
""it but augments my sorrow that ye had not marched the earlier."
""well," said the knight, "what would ye?
the beginning of a feast and the end of a fray, sir messenger;" and he mounted into his saddle.
""why!
how now!"
he cried.
""john!
joanna!
nay, by the sacred rood!
where is she?
host, where is that girl?"
""girl, sir daniel?"
cried the landlord.
""nay, sir, i saw no girl."
""boy, then, dotard!"
cried the knight.
""could ye not see it was a wench?
she in the murrey-coloured mantle -- she that broke her fast with water, rogue -- where is she?"
""nay, the saints bless us!
master john, ye called him," said the host.
""well, i thought none evil.
he is gone.
i saw him -- her -- i saw her in the stable a good hour agone;" a was saddling a grey horse."
""now, by the rood!"
cried sir daniel, "the wench was worth five hundred pound to me and more."
""sir knight," observed the messenger, with bitterness, "while that ye are here, roaring for five hundred pounds, the realm of england is elsewhere being lost and won."
""it is well said," replied sir daniel.
""selden, fall me out with six cross-bowmen; hunt me her down.
i care not what it cost; but, at my returning, let me find her at the moat house.
be it upon your head.
and now, sir messenger, we march."
and the troop broke into a good trot, and selden and his six men were left behind upon the street of kettley, with the staring villagers.
chapter ii -- in the fen it was near six in the may morning when dick began to ride down into the fen upon his homeward way.
the sky was all blue; the jolly wind blew loud and steady; the windmill-sails were spinning; and the willows over all the fen rippling and whitening like a field of corn.
he had been all night in the saddle, but his heart was good and his body sound, and he rode right merrily.
the path went down and down into the marsh, till he lost sight of all the neighbouring landmarks but kettley windmill on the knoll behind him, and the extreme top of tunstall forest far before.
on either hand there were great fields of blowing reeds and willows, pools of water shaking in the wind, and treacherous bogs, as green as emerald, to tempt and to betray the traveller.
the path lay almost straight through the morass.
it was already very ancient; its foundation had been laid by roman soldiery; in the lapse of ages much of it had sunk, and every here and there, for a few hundred yards, it lay submerged below the stagnant waters of the fen.
about a mile from kettley, dick came to one such break in the plain line of causeway, where the reeds and willows grew dispersedly like little islands and confused the eye.
the gap, besides, was more than usually long; it was a place where any stranger might come readily to mischief; and dick bethought him, with something like a pang, of the lad whom he had so imperfectly directed.
as for himself, one look backward to where the windmill sails were turning black against the blue of heaven -- one look forward to the high ground of tunstall forest, and he was sufficiently directed and held straight on, the water washing to his horse's knees, as safe as on a highway.
half-way across, and when he had already sighted the path rising high and dry upon the farther side, he was aware of a great splashing on his right, and saw a grey horse, sunk to its belly in the mud, and still spasmodically struggling.
instantly, as though it had divined the neighbourhood of help, the poor beast began to neigh most piercingly.
it rolled, meanwhile, a blood-shot eye, insane with terror; and as it sprawled wallowing in the quag, clouds of stinging insects rose and buzzed about it in the air.
""alack!"
thought dick, "can the poor lad have perished?
there is his horse, for certain -- a brave grey!
nay, comrade, if thou criest to me so piteously, i will do all man can to help thee.
shalt not lie there to drown by inches!"
and he made ready his crossbow, and put a quarrel through the creature's head.
dick rode on after this act of rugged mercy, somewhat sobered in spirit, and looking closely about him for any sign of his less happy predecessor in the way.
""i would i had dared to tell him further," he thought; "for i fear he has miscarried in the slough."
and just as he was so thinking, a voice cried upon his name from the causeway side, and, looking over his shoulder, he saw the lad's face peering from a clump of reeds.
""are ye there?"
he said, reining in.
""ye lay so close among the reeds that i had passed you by.
i saw your horse bemired, and put him from his agony; which, by my sooth!
an ye had been a more merciful rider, ye had done yourself.
but come forth out of your hiding.
here be none to trouble you."
""nay, good boy, i have no arms, nor skill to use them if i had," replied the other, stepping forth upon the pathway.
""why call me "boy"?"
cried dick.
""y" are not, i trow, the elder of us twain."
""good master shelton," said the other, "prithee forgive me.
i have none the least intention to offend.
rather i would in every way beseech your gentleness and favour, for i am now worse bested than ever, having lost my way, my cloak, and my poor horse.
to have a riding-rod and spurs, and never a horse to sit upon!
and before all," he added, looking ruefully upon his clothes -- "before all, to be so sorrily besmirched!"
""tut!"
cried dick.
""would ye mind a ducking?
blood of wound or dust of travel -- that's a man's adornment."
""nay, then, i like him better plain," observed the lad.
""but, prithee, how shall i do?
prithee, good master richard, help me with your good counsel.
if i come not safe to holywood, i am undone."
""nay," said dick, dismounting, "i will give more than counsel.
take my horse, and i will run awhile, and when i am weary we shall change again, that so, riding and running, both may go the speedier."
so the change was made, and they went forward as briskly as they durst on the uneven causeway, dick with his hand upon the other's knee.
""how call ye your name?"
asked dick.
""call me john matcham," replied the lad.
""and what make ye to holywood?"
dick continued.
""i seek sanctuary from a man that would oppress me," was the answer.
""the good abbot of holywood is a strong pillar to the weak."
""and how came ye with sir daniel, master matcham?"
pursued dick.
""nay," cried the other, "by the abuse of force!
he hath taken me by violence from my own place; dressed me in these weeds; ridden with me till my heart was sick; gibed me till i could "a" wept; and when certain of my friends pursued, thinking to have me back, claps me in the rear to stand their shot!
i was even grazed in the right foot, and walk but lamely.
nay, there shall come a day between us; he shall smart for all!"
""would ye shoot at the moon with a hand-gun?"
said dick."
't is a valiant knight, and hath a hand of iron.
an he guessed i had made or meddled with your flight, it would go sore with me."
""ay, poor boy," returned the other, "y" are his ward, i know it.
by the same token, so am i, or so he saith; or else he hath bought my marriage -- i wot not rightly which; but it is some handle to oppress me by."
""boy again!"
said dick.
""nay, then, shall i call you girl, good richard?"
asked matcham.
""never a girl for me," returned dick.
""i do abjure the crew of them!"
""ye speak boyishly," said the other.
""ye think more of them than ye pretend."
""not i," said dick, stoutly.
""they come not in my mind.
a plague of them, say i!
give me to hunt and to fight and to feast, and to live with jolly foresters.
i never heard of a maid yet that was for any service, save one only; and she, poor shrew, was burned for a witch and the wearing of men's clothes in spite of nature."
master matcham crossed himself with fervour, and appeared to pray.
""what make ye?"
dick inquired.
""i pray for her spirit," answered the other, with a somewhat troubled voice.
""for a witch's spirit?"
dick cried.
""but pray for her, an ye list; she was the best wench in europe, was this joan of arc.
old appleyard the archer ran from her, he said, as if she had been mahoun.
nay, she was a brave wench."
""well, but, good master richard," resumed matcham, "an ye like maids so little, y" are no true natural man; for god made them twain by intention, and brought true love into the world, to be man's hope and woman's comfort."
""faugh!"
said dick.
""y" are a milk-sopping baby, so to harp on women.
an ye think i be no true man, get down upon the path, and whether at fists, back-sword, or bow and arrow, i will prove my manhood on your body."
""nay, i am no fighter," said matcham, eagerly.
""i mean no tittle of offence.
i meant but pleasantry.
and if i talk of women, it is because i heard ye were to marry."
""i to marry!"
dick exclaimed.
""well, it is the first i hear of it.
and with whom was i to marry?"
""one joan sedley," replied matcham, colouring.
""it was sir daniel's doing; he hath money to gain upon both sides; and, indeed, i have heard the poor wench bemoaning herself pitifully of the match.
it seems she is of your mind, or else distasted to the bridegroom."
""well!
marriage is like death, it comes to all," said dick, with resignation.
""and she bemoaned herself?
i pray ye now, see there how shuttle-witted are these girls: to bemoan herself before that she had seen me!
do i bemoan myself?
not i.
an i be to marry, i will marry dry-eyed!
but if ye know her, prithee, of what favour is she?
fair or foul?
and is she shrewish or pleasant?"
""nay, what matters it?"
said matcham.
""an y" are to marry, ye can but marry.
what matters foul or fair?
these be but toys.
y" are no milksop, master richard; ye will wed with dry eyes, anyhow."
""it is well said," replied shelton.
""little i reck."
""your lady wife is like to have a pleasant lord," said matcham.
""she shall have the lord heaven made her for," returned dick.
""it trow there be worse as well as better."
""ah, the poor wench!"
cried the other.
""and why so poor?"
asked dick.
""to wed a man of wood," replied his companion.
""o me, for a wooden husband!"
""i think i be a man of wood, indeed," said dick, "to trudge afoot the while you ride my horse; but it is good wood, i trow."
""good dick, forgive me," cried the other.
""nay, y" are the best heart in england; i but laughed.
forgive me now, sweet dick."
""nay, no fool words," returned dick, a little embarrassed by his companion's warmth.
""no harm is done.
i am not touchy, praise the saints."
and at that moment the wind, which was blowing straight behind them as they went, brought them the rough flourish of sir daniel's trumpeter.
""hark!"
said dick, "the tucket soundeth."
""ay," said matcham, "they have found my flight, and now i am unhorsed!"
and he became pale as death.
""nay, what cheer!"
returned dick.
""y" have a long start, and we are near the ferry.
and it is i, methinks, that am unhorsed."
""alack, i shall be taken!"
cried the fugitive.
""dick, kind dick, beseech ye help me but a little!"
""why, now, what aileth thee?"
said dick.
""methinks i help you very patently.
but my heart is sorry for so spiritless a fellow!
and see ye here, john matcham -- sith john matcham is your name -- i, richard shelton, tide what betideth, come what may, will see you safe in holywood.
the saints so do to me again if i default you.
come, pick me up a good heart, sir white-face.
the way betters here; spur me the horse.
go faster!
faster!
nay, mind not for me; i can run like a deer."
so, with the horse trotting hard, and dick running easily alongside, they crossed the remainder of the fen, and came out upon the banks of the river by the ferryman's hut.
chapter iii -- the fen ferry the river till was a wide, sluggish, clayey water, oozing out of fens, and in this part of its course it strained among some score of willow-covered, marshy islets.
it was a dingy stream; but upon this bright, spirited morning everything was become beautiful.
the wind and the martens broke it up into innumerable dimples; and the reflection of the sky was scattered over all the surface in crumbs of smiling blue.
a creek ran up to meet the path, and close under the bank the ferryman's hut lay snugly.
it was of wattle and clay, and the grass grew green upon the roof.
dick went to the door and opened it.
within, upon a foul old russet cloak, the ferryman lay stretched and shivering; a great hulk of a man, but lean and shaken by the country fever.
""hey, master shelton," he said, "be ye for the ferry?
ill times, ill times!
look to yourself.
there is a fellowship abroad.
ye were better turn round on your two heels and try the bridge."
""nay; time's in the saddle," answered dick.
""time will ride, hugh ferryman.
i am hot in haste."
""a wilful man!"
returned the ferryman, rising.
""an ye win safe to the moat house, y" have done lucky; but i say no more."
and then catching sight of matcham, "who be this?"
he asked, as he paused, blinking, on the threshold of his cabin.
""it is my kinsman, master matcham," answered dick.
""give ye good day, good ferryman," said matcham, who had dismounted, and now came forward, leading the horse.
""launch me your boat, i prithee; we are sore in haste."
the gaunt ferryman continued staring.
""by the mass!"
he cried at length, and laughed with open throat.
matcham coloured to his neck and winced; and dick, with an angry countenance, put his hand on the lout's shoulder.
""how now, churl!"
he cried.
""fall to thy business, and leave mocking thy betters."
hugh ferryman grumblingly undid his boat, and shoved it a little forth into the deep water.
then dick led in the horse, and matcham followed.
""ye be mortal small made, master," said hugh, with a wide grin; "something o" the wrong model, belike.
nay, master shelton, i am for you," he added, getting to his oars.
""a cat may look at a king.
i did but take a shot of the eye at master matcham."
""sirrah, no more words," said dick.
""bend me your back."
they were by that time at the mouth of the creek, and the view opened up and down the river.
everywhere it was enclosed with islands.
clay banks were falling in, willows nodding, reeds waving, martens dipping and piping.
there was no sign of man in the labyrinth of waters.
""my master," said the ferryman, keeping the boat steady with one oar, "i have a shrew guess that john-a-fenne is on the island.
he bears me a black grudge to all sir daniel's.
how if i turned me up stream and landed you an arrow-flight above the path?
ye were best not meddle with john fenne."
""how, then?
is he of this company?"
asked dick.
""nay, mum is the word," said hugh.
""but i would go up water, dick.
how if master matcham came by an arrow?"
and he laughed again.
""be it so, hugh," answered dick.
""look ye, then," pursued hugh.
""sith it shall so be, unsling me your cross-bow -- so: now make it ready -- good; place me a quarrel.
ay, keep it so, and look upon me grimly."
""what meaneth this?"
asked dick.
""why, my master, if i steal you across, it must be under force or fear," replied the ferryman; "for else, if john fenne got wind of it, he were like to prove my most distressful neighbour."
""do these churls ride so roughly?"
dick inquired.
""do they command sir daniel's own ferry?"
""nay," whispered the ferryman, winking.
""mark me!
sir daniel shall down.
his time is out.
he shall down.
mum!"
and he bent over his oars.
they pulled a long way up the river, turned the tail of an island, and came softly down a narrow channel next the opposite bank.
then hugh held water in midstream.
""i must land you here among the willows," he said.
""here is no path but willow swamps and quagmires," answered dick.
""master shelton," replied hugh, "i dare not take ye nearer down, for your own sake now.
he watcheth me the ferry, lying on his bow.
all that go by and owe sir daniel goodwill, he shooteth down like rabbits.
i heard him swear it by the rood.
an i had not known you of old days -- ay, and from so high upward -- i would "a" let you go on; but for old days" remembrance, and because ye had this toy with you that's not fit for wounds or warfare, i did risk my two poor ears to have you over whole.
content you; i can no more, on my salvation!"
hugh was still speaking, lying on his oars, when there came a great shout from among the willows on the island, and sounds followed as of a strong man breasting roughly through the wood.
""a murrain!"
cried hugh.
""he was on the upper island all the while!"
he pulled straight for shore.
""threat me with your bow, good dick; threat me with it plain," he added.
""i have tried to save your skins, save you mine!"
the boat ran into a tough thicket of willows with a crash.
matcham, pale, but steady and alert, at a sign from dick, ran along the thwarts and leaped ashore; dick, taking the horse by the bridle, sought to follow, but what with the animal's bulk, and what with the closeness of the thicket, both stuck fast.
the horse neighed and trampled; and the boat, which was swinging in an eddy, came on and off and pitched with violence.
""it may not be, hugh; here is no landing," cried dick; but he still struggled valiantly with the obstinate thicket and the startled animal.
a tall man appeared upon the shore of the island, a long-bow in his hand.
dick saw him for an instant, with the corner of his eye, bending the bow with a great effort, his face crimson with hurry.
""who goes?"
he shouted.
""hugh, who goes?""
't is master shelton, john," replied the ferryman.
""stand, dick shelton!"
bawled the man upon the island.
""ye shall have no hurt, upon the rood!
stand!
back out, hugh ferryman."
dick cried a taunting answer.
""nay, then, ye shall go afoot," returned the man; and he let drive an arrow.
the horse, struck by the shaft, lashed out in agony and terror; the boat capsized, and the next moment all were struggling in the eddies of the river.
when dick came up, he was within a yard of the bank; and before his eyes were clear, his hand had closed on something firm and strong that instantly began to drag him forward.
it was the riding-rod, that matcham, crawling forth upon an overhanging willow, had opportunely thrust into his grasp.
""by the mass!"
cried dick, as he was helped ashore, "that makes a life i owe you.
i swim like a cannon-ball."
and he turned instantly towards the island.
midway over, hugh ferryman was swimming with his upturned boat, while john-a-fenne, furious at the ill-fortune of his shot, bawled to him to hurry.
""come, jack," said shelton, "run for it!
ere hugh can hale his barge across, or the pair of'em can get it righted, we may be out of cry."
and adding example to his words, he began to run, dodging among the willows, and in marshy places leaping from tussock to tussock.
he had no time to look for his direction; all he could do was to turn his back upon the river, and put all his heart to running.
presently, however, the ground began to rise, which showed him he was still in the right way, and soon after they came forth upon a slope of solid turf, where elms began to mingle with the willows.
but here matcham, who had been dragging far into the rear, threw himself fairly down.
""leave me, dick!"
he cried, pantingly; "i can no more."
dick turned, and came back to where his companion lay.
""nay, jack, leave thee!"
he cried.
""that were a knave's trick, to be sure, when ye risked a shot and a ducking, ay, and a drowning too, to save my life.
drowning, in sooth; for why i did not pull you in along with me, the saints alone can tell!"
""nay," said matcham, "i would "a" saved us both, good dick, for i can swim."
""can ye so?"
cried dick, with open eyes.
it was the one manly accomplishment of which he was himself incapable.
in the order of the things that he admired, next to having killed a man in single fight came swimming.
""well," he said, "here is a lesson to despise no man.
i promised to care for you as far as holywood, and, by the rood, jack, y" are more capable to care for me."
""well, dick, we're friends now," said matcham.
""nay, i never was unfriends," answered dick.
""y" are a brave lad in your way, albeit something of a milksop, too.
i never met your like before this day.
but, prithee, fetch back your breath, and let us on.
here is no place for chatter."
""my foot hurts shrewdly," said matcham.
""nay, i had forgot your foot," returned dick.
""well, we must go the gentlier.
i would i knew rightly where we were.
i have clean lost the path; yet that may be for the better, too.
an they watch the ferry, they watch the path, belike, as well.
i would sir daniel were back with two score men; he would sweep me these rascals as the wind sweeps leaves.
come, jack, lean ye on my shoulder, ye poor shrew.
nay, y" are not tall enough.
what age are ye, for a wager?
-- twelve?"
""nay, i am sixteen," said matcham.
""y" are poorly grown to height, then," answered dick.
""but take my hand.
we shall go softly, never fear.
i owe you a life; i am a good repayer, jack, of good or evil."
they began to go forward up the slope.
""we must hit the road, early or late," continued dick; "and then for a fresh start.
by the mass!
but y" "ave a rickety hand, jack.
if i had a hand like that, i would think shame.
i tell you," he went on, with a sudden chuckle, "i swear by the mass i believe hugh ferryman took you for a maid."
""nay, never!"
cried the other, colouring high.
""a" did, though, for a wager!"
dick exclaimed.
""small blame to him.
ye look liker maid than man; and i tell you more -- y" are a strange-looking rogue for a boy; but for a hussy, jack, ye would be right fair -- ye would.
ye would be well favoured for a wench."
""well," said matcham, "ye know right well that i am none."
""nay, i know that; i do but jest," said dick.
""ye'll be a man before your mother, jack.
what cheer, my bully!
ye shall strike shrewd strokes.
now, which, i marvel, of you or me, shall be first knighted, jack?
for knighted i shall be, or die for "t. "sir richard shelton, knight": it soundeth bravely.
but "sir john matcham" soundeth not amiss."
""prithee, dick, stop till i drink," said the other, pausing where a little clear spring welled out of the slope into a gravelled basin no bigger than a pocket.
""and o, dick, if i might come by anything to eat!
-- my very heart aches with hunger."
""why, fool, did ye not eat at kettley?"
asked dick.
""i had made a vow -- it was a sin i had been led into," stammered matcham; "but now, if it were but dry bread, i would eat it greedily."
""sit ye, then, and eat," said dick, "while that i scout a little forward for the road."
and he took a wallet from his girdle, wherein were bread and pieces of dry bacon, and, while matcham fell heartily to, struck farther forth among the trees.
a little beyond there was a dip in the ground, where a streamlet soaked among dead leaves; and beyond that, again, the trees were better grown and stood wider, and oak and beech began to take the place of willow and elm.
the continued tossing and pouring of the wind among the leaves sufficiently concealed the sounds of his footsteps on the mast; it was for the ear what a moonless night is to the eye; but for all that dick went cautiously, slipping from one big trunk to another, and looking sharply about him as he went.
suddenly a doe passed like a shadow through the underwood in front of him, and he paused, disgusted at the chance.
this part of the wood had been certainly deserted, but now that the poor deer had run, she was like a messenger he should have sent before him to announce his coming; and instead of pushing farther, he turned him to the nearest well-grown tree, and rapidly began to climb.
luck had served him well.
the oak on which he had mounted was one of the tallest in that quarter of the wood, and easily out-topped its neighbours by a fathom and a half; and when dick had clambered into the topmost fork and clung there, swinging dizzily in the great wind, he saw behind him the whole fenny plain as far as kettley, and the till wandering among woody islets, and in front of him, the white line of high-road winding through the forest.
the boat had been righted -- it was even now midway on the ferry.
beyond that there was no sign of man, nor aught moving but the wind.
he was about to descend, when, taking a last view, his eye lit upon a string of moving points about the middle of the fen.
plainly a small troop was threading the causeway, and that at a good pace; and this gave him some concern as he shinned vigorously down the trunk and returned across the wood for his companion.
chapter iv -- a greenwood company matcham was well rested and revived; and the two lads, winged by what dick had seen, hurried through the remainder of the outwood, crossed the road in safety, and began to mount into the high ground of tunstall forest.
the trees grew more and more in groves, with heathy places in between, sandy, gorsy, and dotted with old yews.
the ground became more and more uneven, full of pits and hillocks.
and with every step of the ascent the wind still blew the shriller, and the trees bent before the gusts like fishing-rods.
they had just entered one of the clearings, when dick suddenly clapped down upon his face among the brambles, and began to crawl slowly backward towards the shelter of the grove.
matcham, in great bewilderment, for he could see no reason for this flight, still imitated his companion's course; and it was not until they had gained the harbour of a thicket that he turned and begged him to explain.
for all reply, dick pointed with his finger.
at the far end of the clearing, a fir grew high above the neighbouring wood, and planted its black shock of foliage clear against the sky.
for about fifty feet above the ground the trunk grew straight and solid like a column.
at that level, it split into two massive boughs; and in the fork, like a mast-headed seaman, there stood a man in a green tabard, spying far and wide.
the sun glistened upon his hair; with one hand he shaded his eyes to look abroad, and he kept slowly rolling his head from side to side, with the regularity of a machine.
the lads exchanged glances.
""let us try to the left," said dick.
""we had near fallen foully, jack."
ten minutes afterwards they struck into a beaten path.
""here is a piece of forest that i know not," dick remarked.
""where goeth me this track?"
""let us even try," said matcham.
a few yards further, the path came to the top of a ridge and began to go down abruptly into a cup-shaped hollow.
at the foot, out of a thick wood of flowering hawthorn, two or three roofless gables, blackened as if by fire, and a single tall chimney marked the ruins of a house.
""what may this be?"
whispered matcham.
""nay, by the mass, i know not," answered dick.
""i am all at sea.
let us go warily."
with beating hearts, they descended through the hawthorns.
here and there, they passed signs of recent cultivation; fruit trees and pot herbs ran wild among the thicket; a sun-dial had fallen in the grass; it seemed they were treading what once had been a garden.
yet a little farther and they came forth before the ruins of the house.
it had been a pleasant mansion and a strong.
a dry ditch was dug deep about it; but it was now choked with masonry, and bridged by a fallen rafter.
the two farther walls still stood, the sun shining through their empty windows; but the remainder of the building had collapsed, and now lay in a great cairn of ruin, grimed with fire.
already in the interior a few plants were springing green among the chinks.
""now i bethink me," whispered dick, "this must be grimstone.
it was a hold of one simon malmesbury; sir daniel was his bane!
't was bennet hatch that burned it, now five years agone.
in sooth,'t was pity, for it was a fair house."
down in the hollow, where no wind blew, it was both warm and still; and matcham, laying one hand upon dick's arm, held up a warning finger.
""hist!"
he said.
then came a strange sound, breaking on the quiet.
it was twice repeated ere they recognised its nature.
it was the sound of a big man clearing his throat; and just then a hoarse, untuneful voice broke into singing.
""then up and spake the master, the king of the outlaws: "what make ye here, my merry men, among the greenwood shaws?"
and gamelyn made answer -- he looked never adown: "o, they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town!""
the singer paused, a faint clink of iron followed, and then silence.
the two lads stood looking at each other.
whoever he might be, their invisible neighbour was just beyond the ruin.
and suddenly the colour came into matcham's face, and next moment he had crossed the fallen rafter, and was climbing cautiously on the huge pile of lumber that filled the interior of the roofless house.
dick would have withheld him, had he been in time; as it was, he was fain to follow.
right in the corner of the ruin, two rafters had fallen crosswise, and protected a clear space no larger than a pew in church.
into this the lads silently lowered themselves.
there they were perfectly concealed, and through an arrow-loophole commanded a view upon the farther side.
peering through this, they were struck stiff with terror at their predicament.
to retreat was impossible; they scarce dared to breathe.
upon the very margin of the ditch, not thirty feet from where they crouched, an iron caldron bubbled and steamed above a glowing fire; and close by, in an attitude of listening, as though he had caught some sound of their clambering among the ruins, a tall, red-faced, battered-looking man stood poised, an iron spoon in his right hand, a horn and a formidable dagger at his belt.
plainly this was the singer; plainly he had been stirring the caldron, when some incautious step among the lumber had fallen upon his ear.
a little further off, another man lay slumbering, rolled in a brown cloak, with a butterfly hovering above his face.
all this was in a clearing white with daisies; and at the extreme verge, a bow, a sheaf of arrows, and part of a deer's carcase, hung upon a flowering hawthorn.
presently the fellow relaxed from his attitude of attention, raised the spoon to his mouth, tasted its contents, nodded, and then fell again to stirring and singing."
"o, they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town,"" he croaked, taking up his song where he had left it.
""o, sir, we walk not here at all an evil thing to do.
but if we meet with the good king's deer to shoot a shaft into."
still as he sang, he took from time to time, another spoonful of the broth, blew upon it, and tasted it, with all the airs of an experienced cook.
at length, apparently, he judged the mess was ready; for taking the horn from his girdle, he blew three modulated calls.
the other fellow awoke, rolled over, brushed away the butterfly, and looked about him.
""how now, brother?"
he said.
""dinner?"
""ay, sot," replied the cook, "dinner it is, and a dry dinner, too, with neither ale nor bread.
but there is little pleasure in the greenwood now; time was when a good fellow could live here like a mitred abbot, set aside the rain and the white frosts; he had his heart's desire both of ale and wine.
but now are men's spirits dead; and this john amend-all, save us and guard us!
but a stuffed booby to scare crows withal."
""nay," returned the other, "y" are too set on meat and drinking, lawless.
bide ye a bit; the good time cometh."
""look ye," returned the cook, "i have even waited for this good time sith that i was so high.
i have been a grey friar; i have been a king's archer; i have been a shipman, and sailed the salt seas; and i have been in greenwood before this, forsooth!
and shot the king's deer.
what cometh of it?
naught!
i were better to have bided in the cloister.
john abbot availeth more than john amend-all.
by" r lady!
here they come."
one after another, tall, likely fellows began to stroll into the lawn.
each as he came produced a knife and a horn cup, helped himself from the caldron, and sat down upon the grass to eat.
they were very variously equipped and armed; some in rusty smocks, and with nothing but a knife and an old bow; others in the height of forest gallantry, all in lincoln green, both hood and jerkin, with dainty peacock arrows in their belts, a horn upon a baldrick, and a sword and dagger at their sides.
they came in the silence of hunger, and scarce growled a salutation, but fell instantly to meat.
there were, perhaps, a score of them already gathered, when a sound of suppressed cheering arose close by among the hawthorns, and immediately after five or six woodmen carrying a stretcher debauched upon the lawn.
a tall, lusty fellow, somewhat grizzled, and as brown as a smoked ham, walked before them with an air of some authority, his bow at his back, a bright boar-spear in his hand.
""lads!"
he cried, "good fellows all, and my right merry friends, y" have sung this while on a dry whistle and lived at little ease.
but what said i ever?
abide fortune constantly; she turneth, turneth swift.
and lo!
here is her little firstling -- even that good creature, ale!"
there was a murmur of applause as the bearers set down the stretcher and displayed a goodly cask.
""and now haste ye, boys," the man continued.
""there is work toward.
a handful of archers are but now come to the ferry; murrey and blue is their wear; they are our butts -- they shall all taste arrows -- no man of them shall struggle through this wood.
for, lads, we are here some fifty strong, each man of us most foully wronged; for some they have lost lands, and some friends; and some they have been outlawed -- all oppressed!
who, then, hath done this evil?
sir daniel, by the rood!
shall he then profit?
shall he sit snug in our houses?
shall he till our fields?
shall he suck the bone he robbed us of?
i trow not.
he getteth him strength at law; he gaineth cases; nay, there is one case he shall not gain -- i have a writ here at my belt that, please the saints, shall conquer him."
lawless the cook was by this time already at his second horn of ale.
he raised it, as if to pledge the speaker.
""master ellis," he said, "y" are for vengeance -- well it becometh you!
-- but your poor brother o" the greenwood, that had never lands to lose nor friends to think upon, looketh rather, for his poor part, to the profit of the thing.
he had liever a gold noble and a pottle of canary wine than all the vengeances in purgatory."
""lawless," replied the other, "to reach the moat house, sir daniel must pass the forest.
we shall make that passage dearer, pardy, than any battle.
then, when he hath got to earth with such ragged handful as escapeth us -- all his great friends fallen and fled away, and none to give him aid -- we shall beleaguer that old fox about, and great shall be the fall of him.
't is a fat buck; he will make a dinner for us all."
""ay," returned lawless, "i have eaten many of these dinners beforehand; but the cooking of them is hot work, good master ellis.
and meanwhile what do we?
we make black arrows, we write rhymes, and we drink fair cold water, that discomfortable drink."
""y" are untrue, will lawless.
ye still smell of the grey friars" buttery; greed is your undoing," answered ellis.
""we took twenty pounds from appleyard.
we took seven marks from the messenger last night.
a day ago we had fifty from the merchant."
""and to-day," said one of the men, "i stopped a fat pardoner riding apace for holywood.
here is his purse."
ellis counted the contents.
""five score shillings!"
he grumbled.
""fool, he had more in his sandal, or stitched into his tippet.
y" are but a child, tom cuckow; ye have lost the fish."
but, for all that, ellis pocketed the purse with nonchalance.
he stood leaning on his boar-spear, and looked round upon the rest.
they, in various attitudes, took greedily of the venison pottage, and liberally washed it down with ale.
this was a good day; they were in luck; but business pressed, and they were speedy in their eating.
the first-comers had by this time even despatched their dinner.
some lay down upon the grass and fell instantly asleep, like boa-constrictors; others talked together, or overhauled their weapons: and one, whose humour was particularly gay, holding forth an ale-horn, began to sing: "here is no law in good green shaw, here is no lack of meat;'t is merry and quiet, with deer for our diet, in summer, when all is sweet.
come winter again, with wind and rain -- come winter, with snow and sleet, get home to your places, with hoods on your faces, and sit by the fire and eat."
all this while the two lads had listened and lain close; only richard had unslung his cross-bow, and held ready in one hand the windac, or grappling-iron that he used to bend it.
otherwise they had not dared to stir; and this scene of forest life had gone on before their eyes like a scene upon a theatre.
but now there came a strange interruption.
the tall chimney which over-topped the remainder of the ruins rose right above their hiding-place.
there came a whistle in the air, and then a sounding smack, and the fragments of a broken arrow fell about their ears.
some one from the upper quarters of the wood, perhaps the very sentinel they saw posted in the fir, had shot an arrow at the chimney-top.
matcham could not restrain a little cry, which he instantly stifled, and even dick started with surprise, and dropped the windac from his fingers.
but to the fellows on the lawn, this shaft was an expected signal.
they were all afoot together, tightening their belts, testing their bow-strings, loosening sword and dagger in the sheath.
ellis held up his hand; his face had suddenly assumed a look of savage energy; the white of his eyes shone in his sun-brown face.
""lads," he said, "ye know your places.
let not one man's soul escape you.
appleyard was a whet before a meal; but now we go to table.
i have three men whom i will bitterly avenge -- harry shelton, simon malmesbury, and" -- striking his broad bosom -- "and ellis duckworth, by the mass!"
another man came, red with hurry, through the thorns."
't is not sir daniel!"
he panted.
""they are but seven.
is the arrow gone?"
""it struck but now," replied ellis.
""a murrain!"
cried the messenger.
""methought i heard it whistle.
and i go dinnerless!"
in the space of a minute, some running, some walking sharply, according as their stations were nearer or farther away, the men of the black arrow had all disappeared from the neighbourhood of the ruined house; and the caldron, and the fire, which was now burning low, and the dead deer's carcase on the hawthorn, remained alone to testify they had been there.
chapter v -- "bloody as the hunter" the lads lay quiet till the last footstep had melted on the wind.
then they arose, and with many an ache, for they were weary with constraint, clambered through the ruins, and recrossed the ditch upon the rafter.
matcham had picked up the windac and went first, dick following stiffly, with his cross-bow on his arm.
""and now," said matcham, "forth to holywood."
""to holywood!"
cried dick, "when good fellows stand shot?
not i!
i would see you hanged first, jack!"
""ye would leave me, would ye?"
matcham asked.
""ay, by my sooth!"
returned dick.
""an i be not in time to warn these lads, i will go die with them.
what!
would ye have me leave my own men that i have lived among.
i trow not!
give me my windac."
but there was nothing further from matcham's mind.
""dick," he said, "ye sware before the saints that ye would see me safe to holywood.
would ye be forsworn?
would you desert me -- a perjurer?"
""nay, i sware for the best," returned dick.
""i meant it too; but now!
but look ye, jack, turn again with me.
let me but warn these men, and, if needs must, stand shot with them; then shall all be clear, and i will on again to holywood and purge mine oath."
""ye but deride me," answered matcham.
""these men ye go to succour are the i same that hunt me to my ruin."
dick scratched his head.
""i can not help it, jack," he said.
""here is no remedy.
what would ye?
ye run no great peril, man; and these are in the way of death.
death!"
he added.
""think of it!
what a murrain do ye keep me here for?
give me the windac.
saint george!
shall they all die?"
""richard shelton," said matcham, looking him squarely in the face, "would ye, then, join party with sir daniel?
have ye not ears?
heard ye not this ellis, what he said?
or have ye no heart for your own kindly blood and the father that men slew?
"harry shelton," he said; and sir harry shelton was your father, as the sun shines in heaven."
""what would ye?"
dick cried again.
""would ye have me credit thieves?"
""nay, i have heard it before now," returned matcham.
""the fame goeth currently, it was sir daniel slew him.
he slew him under oath; in his own house he shed the innocent blood.
heaven wearies for the avenging o n't; and you -- the man's son -- ye go about to comfort and defend the murderer!"
""jack," cried the lad "i know not.
it may be; what know i?
but, see here: this man hath bred me up and fostered me, and his men i have hunted with and played among; and to leave them in the hour of peril -- o, man, if i did that, i were stark dead to honour!
nay, jack, ye would not ask it; ye would not wish me to be base."
""but your father, dick?"
said matcham, somewhat wavering.
""your father?
and your oath to me?
ye took the saints to witness."
""my father?"
cried shelton.
""nay, he would have me go!
if sir daniel slew him, when the hour comes this hand shall slay sir daniel; but neither him nor his will i desert in peril.
and for mine oath, good jack, ye shall absolve me of it here.
for the lives" sake of many men that hurt you not, and for mine honour, ye shall set me free."
""i, dick?
never!"
returned matcham.
""an ye leave me, y" are forsworn, and so i shall declare it."
""my blood heats," said dick.
""give me the windac!
give it me!"
""i'll not," said matcham.
""i'll save you in your teeth."
""not?"
cried dick.
""i'll make you!"
""try it," said the other.
they stood, looking in each other's eyes, each ready for a spring.
then dick leaped; and though matcham turned instantly and fled, in two bounds he was over-taken, the windac was twisted from his grasp, he was thrown roughly to the ground, and dick stood across him, flushed and menacing, with doubled fist.
matcham lay where he had fallen, with his face in the grass, not thinking of resistance.
dick bent his bow.
""i'll teach you!"
he cried, fiercely.
""oath or no oath, ye may go hang for me!"
and he turned and began to run.
matcham was on his feet at once, and began running after him.
""what d'ye want?"
cried dick, stopping.
""what make ye after me?
stand off!"
""will follow an i please," said matcham.
""this wood is free to me."
""stand back, by" r lady!"
returned dick, raising his bow.
""ah, y" are a brave boy!"
retorted matcham.
""shoot!"
dick lowered his weapon in some confusion.
""see here," he said.
""y" have done me ill enough.
go, then.
go your way in fair wise; or, whether i will or not, i must even drive you to it."
""well," said matcham, doggedly, "y" are the stronger.
do your worst.
i shall not leave to follow thee, dick, unless thou makest me," he added.
dick was almost beside himself.
it went against his heart to beat a creature so defenceless; and, for the life of him, he knew no other way to rid himself of this unwelcome and, as he began to think, perhaps untrue companion.
""y" are mad, i think," he cried.
""fool-fellow, i am hasting to your foes; as fast as foot can carry me, go i thither."
""i care not, dick," replied the lad.
""if y" are bound to die, dick, i'll die too.
i would liever go with you to prison than to go free without you."
""well," returned the other, "i may stand no longer prating.
follow me, if ye must; but if ye play me false, it shall but little advance you, mark ye that.
shalt have a quarrel in thine inwards, boy."
so saying, dick took once more to his heels, keeping in the margin of the thicket and looking briskly about him as he went.
at a good pace he rattled out of the dell, and came again into the more open quarters of the wood.
to the left a little eminence appeared, spotted with golden gorse, and crowned with a black tuft of firs.
""i shall see from there," he thought, and struck for it across a heathy clearing.
he had gone but a few yards, when matcham touched him on the arm, and pointed.
to the eastward of the summit there was a dip, and, as it were, a valley passing to the other side; the heath was not yet out; all the ground was rusty, like an unscoured buckler, and dotted sparingly with yews; and there, one following another, dick saw half a score green jerkins mounting the ascent, and marching at their head, conspicuous by his boar-spear, ellis duckworth in person.
one after another gained the top, showed for a moment against the sky, and then dipped upon the further side, until the last was gone.
dick looked at matcham with a kindlier eye.
""so y" are to be true to me, jack?"
he asked.
""i thought ye were of the other party."
matcham began to sob.
""what cheer!"
cried dick.
""now the saints behold us!
would ye snivel for a word?"
""ye hurt me," sobbed matcham.
""ye hurt me when ye threw me down.
y" are a coward to abuse your strength."
""nay, that is fool's talk," said dick, roughly.
""y" had no title to my windac, master john.
i would "a" done right to have well basted you.
if ye go with me, ye must obey me; and so, come."
matcham had half a thought to stay behind; but, seeing that dick continued to scour full-tilt towards the eminence and not so much as looked across his shoulder, he soon thought better of that, and began to run in turn.
but the ground was very difficult and steep; dick had already a long start, and had, at any rate, the lighter heels, and he had long since come to the summit, crawled forward through the firs, and ensconced himself in a thick tuft of gorse, before matcham, panting like a deer, rejoined him, and lay down in silence by his side.
below, in the bottom of a considerable valley, the short cut from tunstall hamlet wound downwards to the ferry.
it was well beaten, and the eye followed it easily from point to point.
here it was bordered by open glades; there the forest closed upon it; every hundred yards it ran beside an ambush.
far down the path, the sun shone on seven steel salets, and from time to time, as the trees opened, selden and his men could be seen riding briskly, still bent upon sir daniel's mission.
the wind had somewhat fallen, but still tussled merrily with the trees, and, perhaps, had appleyard been there, he would have drawn a warning from the troubled conduct of the birds.
""now, mark," dick whispered.
""they be already well advanced into the wood; their safety lieth rather in continuing forward.
but see ye where this wide glade runneth down before us, and in the midst of it, these two score trees make like an island?
there were their safety.
an they but come sound as far as that, i will make shift to warn them.
but my heart misgiveth me; they are but seven against so many, and they but carry cross-bows.
the long-bow, jack, will have the uppermost ever."
meanwhile, selden and his men still wound up the path, ignorant of their danger, and momently drew nearer hand.
once, indeed, they paused, drew into a group, and seemed to point and listen.
but it was something from far away across the plain that had arrested their attention -- a hollow growl of cannon that came, from time to time, upon the wind, and told of the great battle.
it was worth a thought, to be sure; for if the voice of the big guns were thus become audible in tunstall forest, the fight must have rolled ever eastward, and the day, by consequence, gone sore against sir daniel and the lords of the dark rose.
but presently the little troop began again to move forward, and came next to a very open, heathy portion of the way, where but a single tongue of forest ran down to join the road.
they were but just abreast of this, when an arrow shone flying.
one of the men threw up his arms, his horse reared, and both fell and struggled together in a mass.
even from where the boys lay they could hear the rumour of the men's voices crying out; they could see the startled horses prancing, and, presently, as the troop began to recover from their first surprise, one fellow beginning to dismount.
a second arrow from somewhat farther off glanced in a wide arch; a second rider bit the dust.
the man who was dismounting lost hold upon the rein, and his horse fled galloping, and dragged him by the foot along the road, bumping from stone to stone, and battered by the fleeing hoofs.
the four who still kept the saddle instantly broke and scattered; one wheeled and rode, shrieking, towards the ferry; the other three, with loose rein and flying raiment, came galloping up the road from tunstall.
from every clump they passed an arrow sped.
soon a horse fell, but the rider found his feet and continued to pursue his comrades till a second shot despatched him.
another man fell; then another horse; out of the whole troop there was but one fellow left, and he on foot; only, in different directions, the noise of the galloping of three riderless horses was dying fast into the distance.
all this time not one of the assailants had for a moment shown himself.
here and there along the path, horse or man rolled, undespatched, in his agony; but no merciful enemy broke cover to put them from their pain.
the solitary survivor stood bewildered in the road beside his fallen charger.
he had come the length of that broad glade, with the island of timber, pointed out by dick.
he was not, perhaps, five hundred yards from where the boys lay hidden; and they could see him plainly, looking to and fro in deadly expectation.
but nothing came; and the man began to pluck up his courage, and suddenly unslung and bent his bow.
at the same time, by something in his action, dick recognised selden.
at this offer of resistance, from all about him in the covert of the woods there went up the sound of laughter.
a score of men, at least, for this was the very thickest of the ambush, joined in this cruel and untimely mirth.
then an arrow glanced over selden's shoulder; and he leaped and ran a little back.
another dart struck quivering at his heel.
he made for the cover.
a third shaft leaped out right in his face, and fell short in front of him.
and then the laughter was repeated loudly, rising and reechoing from different thickets.
it was plain that his assailants were but baiting him, as men, in those days, baited the poor bull, or as the cat still trifles with the mouse.
the skirmish was well over; farther down the road, a fellow in green was already calmly gathering the arrows; and now, in the evil pleasure of their hearts, they gave themselves the spectacle of their poor fellow-sinner in his torture.
selden began to understand; he uttered a roar of anger, shouldered his cross-bow, and sent a quarrel at a venture into the wood.
chance favoured him, for a slight cry responded.
then, throwing down his weapon, selden began to run before him up the glade, and almost in a straight line for dick and matcham.
the companions of the black arrow now began to shoot in earnest.
but they were properly served; their chance had past; most of them had now to shoot against the sun; and selden, as he ran, bounded from side to side to baffle and deceive their aim.
best of all, by turning up the glade he had defeated their preparations; there were no marksmen posted higher up than the one whom he had just killed or wounded; and the confusion of the foresters" counsels soon became apparent.
a whistle sounded thrice, and then again twice.
it was repeated from another quarter.
the woods on either side became full of the sound of people bursting through the underwood; and a bewildered deer ran out into the open, stood for a second on three feet, with nose in air, and then plunged again into the thicket.
selden still ran, bounding; ever and again an arrow followed him, but still would miss.
it began to appear as if he might escape.
dick had his bow armed, ready to support him; even matcham, forgetful of his interest, took sides at heart for the poor fugitive; and both lads glowed and trembled in the ardour of their hearts.
he was within fifty yards of them, when an arrow struck him and he fell.
he was up again, indeed, upon the instant; but now he ran staggering, and, like a blind man, turned aside from his direction.
dick leaped to his feet and waved to him.
""here!"
he cried.
""this way!
here is help!
nay, run, fellow -- run!"
but just then a second arrow struck selden in the shoulder, between the plates of his brigandine, and, piercing through his jack, brought him, like a stone, to earth.
""o, the poor heart!"
cried matcham, with clasped hands.
and dick stood petrified upon the hill, a mark for archery.
ten to one he had speedily been shot -- for the foresters were furious with themselves, and taken unawares by dick's appearance in the rear of their position -- but instantly, out of a quarter of the wood surprisingly near to the two lads, a stentorian voice arose, the voice of ellis duckworth.
""hold!"
it roared.
""shoot not!
take him alive!
it is young shelton -- harry's son."
and immediately after a shrill whistle sounded several times, and was again taken up and repeated farther off.
the whistle, it appeared, was john amend-all's battle trumpet, by which he published his directions.
""ah, foul fortune!"
cried dick.
""we are undone.
swiftly, jack, come swiftly!"
and the pair turned and ran back through the open pine clump that covered the summit of the hill.
chapter vi -- to the day's end it was, indeed, high time for them to run.
on every side the company of the black arrow was making for the hill.
some, being better runners, or having open ground to run upon, had far outstripped the others, and were already close upon the goal; some, following valleys, had spread out to right and left, and outflanked the lads on either side.
dick plunged into the nearest cover.
it was a tall grove of oaks, firm under foot and clear of underbrush, and as it lay down hill, they made good speed.
there followed next a piece of open, which dick avoided, holding to his left.
two minutes after, and the same obstacle arising, the lads followed the same course.
thus it followed that, while the lads, bending continually to the left, drew nearer and nearer to the high road and the river which they had crossed an hour or two before, the great bulk of their pursuers were leaning to the other hand, and running towards tunstall.
the lads paused to breathe.
there was no sound of pursuit.
dick put his ear to the ground, and still there was nothing; but the wind, to be sure, still made a turmoil in the trees, and it was hard to make certain.
""on again," said dick; and, tired as they were, and matcham limping with his injured foot, they pulled themselves together, and once more pelted down the hill.
three minutes later, they were breasting through a low thicket of evergreen.
high overhead, the tall trees made a continuous roof of foliage.
it was a pillared grove, as high as a cathedral, and except for the hollies among which the lads were struggling, open and smoothly swarded.
on the other side, pushing through the last fringe of evergreen, they blundered forth again into the open twilight of the grove.
""stand!"
cried a voice.
and there, between the huge stems, not fifty feet before them, they beheld a stout fellow in green, sore blown with running, who instantly drew an arrow to the head and covered them.
matcham stopped with a cry; but dick, without a pause, ran straight upon the forester, drawing his dagger as he went.
the other, whether he was startled by the daring of the onslaught, or whether he was hampered by his orders, did not shoot; he stood wavering; and before he had time to come to himself, dick bounded at his throat, and sent him sprawling backward on the turf.
the arrow went one way and the bow another with a sounding twang.
the disarmed forester grappled his assailant; but the dagger shone and descended twice.
then came a couple of groans, and then dick rose to his feet again, and the man lay motionless, stabbed to the heart.
""on!"
said dick; and he once more pelted forward, matcham trailing in the rear.
to say truth, they made but poor speed of it by now, labouring dismally as they ran, and catching for their breath like fish.
matcham had a cruel stitch, and his head swam; and as for dick, his knees were like lead.
but they kept up the form of running with undiminished courage.
presently they came to the end of the grove.
it stopped abruptly; and there, a few yards before them, was the high road from risingham to shoreby, lying, at this point, between two even walls of forest.
at the sight dick paused; and as soon as he stopped running, he became aware of a confused noise, which rapidly grew louder.
it was at first like the rush of a very high gust of wind, but soon it became more definite, and resolved itself into the galloping of horses; and then, in a flash, a whole company of men-at-arms came driving round the corner, swept before the lads, and were gone again upon the instant.
they rode as for their lives, in complete disorder; some of them were wounded; riderless horses galloped at their side with bloody saddles.
they were plainly fugitives from the great battle.
the noise of their passage had scarce begun to die away towards shoreby, before fresh hoofs came echoing in their wake, and another deserter clattered down the road; this time a single rider and, by his splendid armour, a man of high degree.
close after him there followed several baggage-waggons, fleeing at an ungainly canter, the drivers flailing at the horses as if for life.
these must have run early in the day; but their cowardice was not to save them.
for just before they came abreast of where the lads stood wondering, a man in hacked armour, and seemingly beside himself with fury, overtook the waggons, and with the truncheon of a sword, began to cut the drivers down.
some leaped from their places and plunged into the wood; the others he sabred as they sat, cursing them the while for cowards in a voice that was scarce human.
all this time the noise in the distance had continued to increase; the rumble of carts, the clatter of horses, the cries of men, a great, confused rumour, came swelling on the wind; and it was plain that the rout of a whole army was pouring, like an inundation, down the road.
dick stood sombre.
he had meant to follow the highway till the turn for holywood, and now he had to change his plan.
but above all, he had recognised the colours of earl risingham, and he knew that the battle had gone finally against the rose of lancaster.
had sir daniel joined, and was he now a fugitive and ruined?
or had he deserted to the side of york, and was he forfeit to honour?
it was an ugly choice.
""come," he said, sternly; and, turning on his heel, he began to walk forward through the grove, with matcham limping in his rear.
for some time they continued to thread the forest in silence.
it was now growing late; the sun was setting in the plain beyond kettley; the tree-tops overhead glowed golden; but the shadows had begun to grow darker and the chill of the night to fall.
""if there were anything to eat!"
cried dick, suddenly, pausing as he spoke.
matcham sat down and began to weep.
""ye can weep for your own supper, but when it was to save men's lives, your heart was hard enough," said dick, contemptuously.
""y" "ave seven deaths upon your conscience, master john; i'll ne'er forgive you that."
""conscience!"
cried matcham, looking fiercely up.
""mine!
and ye have the man's red blood upon your dagger!
and wherefore did ye slay him, the poor soul?
he drew his arrow, but he let not fly; he held you in his hand, and spared you!
't is as brave to kill a kitten, as a man that not defends himself."
dick was struck dumb.
""i slew him fair.
i ran me in upon his bow," he cried.
""it was a coward blow," returned matcham.
""y" are but a lout and bully, master dick; ye but abuse advantages; let there come a stronger, we will see you truckle at his boot!
ye care not for vengeance, neither -- for your father's death that goes unpaid, and his poor ghost that clamoureth for justice.
but if there come but a poor creature in your hands that lacketh skill and strength, and would befriend you, down she shall go!"
dick was too furious to observe that "she."
""marry!"
he cried, "and here is news!
of any two the one will still be stronger.
the better man throweth the worse, and the worse is well served.
ye deserve a belting, master matcham, for your ill-guidance and unthankfulness to meward; and what ye deserve ye shall have."
and dick, who, even in his angriest temper, still preserved the appearance of composure, began to unbuckle his belt.
""here shall be your supper," he said, grimly.
matcham had stopped his tears; he was as white as a sheet, but he looked dick steadily in the face, and never moved.
dick took a step, swinging the belt.
then he paused, embarrassed by the large eyes and the thin, weary face of his companion.
his courage began to subside.
""say ye were in the wrong, then," he said, lamely.
""nay," said matcham, "i was in the right.
come, cruel!
i be lame; i be weary; i resist not; i ne'er did thee hurt; come, beat me -- coward!"
dick raised the belt at this last provocation, but matcham winced and drew himself together with so cruel an apprehension, that his heart failed him yet again.
the strap fell by his side, and he stood irresolute, feeling like a fool.
""a plague upon thee, shrew!"
he said.
""an ye be so feeble of hand, ye should keep the closer guard upon your tongue.
but i'll be hanged before i beat you!"
and he put on his belt again.
""beat you i will not," he continued; "but forgive you?
-- never.
i knew ye not; ye were my master's enemy; i lent you my horse; my dinner ye have eaten; y" "ave called me a man o" wood, a coward, and a bully.
nay, by the mass!
the measure is filled, and runneth over.
't is a great thing to be weak, i trow: ye can do your worst, yet shall none punish you; ye may steal a man's weapons in the hour of need, yet may the man not take his own again; -- y" are weak, forsooth!
nay, then, if one cometh charging at you with a lance, and crieth he is weak, ye must let him pierce your body through!
tut!
fool words!"
""and yet ye beat me not," returned matcham.
""let be," said dick -- "let be.
i will instruct you.
y" "ave been ill-nurtured, methinks, and yet ye have the makings of some good, and, beyond all question, saved me from the river.
nay, i had forgotten it; i am as thankless as thyself.
but, come, let us on.
an we be for holywood this night, ay, or to-morrow early, we had best set forward speedily."
but though dick had talked himself back into his usual good-humour, matcham had forgiven him nothing.
his violence, the recollection of the forester whom he had slain -- above all, the vision of the upraised belt, were things not easily to be forgotten.
""i will thank you, for the form's sake," said matcham.
""but, in sooth, good master shelton, i had liever find my way alone.
here is a wide wood; prithee, let each choose his path; i owe you a dinner and a lesson.
fare ye well!"
""nay," cried dick, "if that be your tune, so be it, and a plague be with you!"
each turned aside, and they began walking off severally, with no thought of the direction, intent solely on their quarrel.
but dick had not gone ten paces ere his name was called, and matcham came running after.
""dick," he said, "it were unmannerly to part so coldly.
here is my hand, and my heart with it.
for all that wherein you have so excellently served and helped me -- not for the form, but from the heart, i thank you.
fare ye right well."
""well, lad," returned dick, taking the hand which was offered him, "good speed to you, if speed you may.
but i misdoubt it shrewdly.
y" are too disputatious."
so then they separated for the second time; and presently it was dick who was running after matcham.
""here," he said, "take my cross-bow; shalt not go unarmed."
""a cross-bow!"
said matcham.
""nay, boy, i have neither the strength to bend nor yet the skill to aim with it.
it were no help to me, good boy.
but yet i thank you."
the night had now fallen, and under the trees they could no longer read each other's face.
""i will go some little way with you," said dick.
""the night is dark.
i would fain leave you on a path, at least.
my mind misgiveth me, y" are likely to be lost."
without any more words, he began to walk forward, and the other once more followed him.
the blackness grew thicker and thicker.
only here and there, in open places, they saw the sky, dotted with small stars.
in the distance, the noise of the rout of the lancastrian army still continued to be faintly audible; but with every step they left it farther in the rear.
at the end of half an hour of silent progress they came forth upon a broad patch of heathy open.
it glimmered in the light of the stars, shaggy with fern and islanded with clumps of yew.
and here they paused and looked upon each other.
""y" are weary?"
dick said.
""nay, i am so weary," answered matcham, "that methinks i could lie down and die."
""i hear the chiding of a river," returned dick.
""let us go so far forth, for i am sore athirst."
the ground sloped down gently; and, sure enough, in the bottom, they found a little murmuring river, running among willows.
here they threw themselves down together by the brink; and putting their mouths to the level of a starry pool, they drank their fill.
""dick," said matcham, "it may not be.
i can no more."
""i saw a pit as we came down," said dick.
""let us lie down therein and sleep."
""nay, but with all my heart!"
cried matcham.
the pit was sandy and dry; a shock of brambles hung upon one hedge, and made a partial shelter; and there the two lads lay down, keeping close together for the sake of warmth, their quarrel all forgotten.
and soon sleep fell upon them like a cloud, and under the dew and stars they rested peacefully.
chapter vii -- the hooded face they awoke in the grey of the morning; the birds were not yet in full song, but twittered here and there among the woods; the sun was not yet up, but the eastern sky was barred with solemn colours.
half starved and over-weary as they were, they lay without moving, sunk in a delightful lassitude.
and as they thus lay, the clang of a bell fell suddenly upon their ears.
""a bell!"
said dick, sitting up.
""can we be, then, so near to holywood?"
a little after, the bell clanged again, but this time somewhat nearer hand; and from that time forth, and still drawing nearer and nearer, it continued to sound brokenly abroad in the silence of the morning.
""nay, what should this betoken?"
said dick, who was now broad awake.
""it is some one walking," returned matcham, and "the bell tolleth ever as he moves."
""i see that well," said dick.
""but wherefore?
what maketh he in tunstall woods?
jack," he added, "laugh at me an ye will, but i like not the hollow sound of it."
""nay," said matcham, with a shiver, "it hath a doleful note.
an the day were not come" -- but just then the bell, quickening its pace, began to ring thick and hurried, and then it gave a single hammering jangle, and was silent for a space.
""it is as though the bearer had run for a pater-noster while, and then leaped the river," dick observed.
""and now beginneth he again to pace soberly forward," added matcham.
""nay," returned dick -- "nay, not so soberly, jack.
't is a man that walketh you right speedily.
't is a man in some fear of his life, or about some hurried business.
see ye not how swift the beating draweth near?"
""it is now close by," said matcham.
they were now on the edge of the pit; and as the pit itself was on a certain eminence, they commanded a view over the greater proportion of the clearing, up to the thick woods that closed it in.
the daylight, which was very clear and grey, showed them a riband of white footpath wandering among the gorse.
it passed some hundred yards from the pit, and ran the whole length of the clearing, east and west.
by the line of its course, dick judged it should lead more or less directly to the moat house.
upon this path, stepping forth from the margin of the wood, a white figure now appeared.
it paused a little, and seemed to look about; and then, at a slow pace, and bent almost double, it began to draw near across the heath.
at every step the bell clanked.
face, it had none; a white hood, not even pierced with eye-holes, veiled the head; and as the creature moved, it seemed to feel its way with the tapping of a stick.
fear fell upon the lads, as cold as death.
""a leper!"
said dick, hoarsely.
""his touch is death," said matcham.
""let us run."
""not so," returned dick.
""see ye not?
-- he is stone blind.
he guideth him with a staff.
let us lie still; the wind bloweth towards the path, and he will go by and hurt us not.
alas, poor soul, and we should rather pity him!"
""i will pity him when he is by," replied matcham.
the blind leper was now about halfway towards them, and just then the sun rose and shone full on his veiled face.
he had been a tall man before he was bowed by his disgusting sickness, and even now he walked with a vigorous step.
the dismal beating of his bell, the pattering of the stick, the eyeless screen before his countenance, and the knowledge that he was not only doomed to death and suffering, but shut out for ever from the touch of his fellow-men, filled the lads" bosoms with dismay; and at every step that brought him nearer, their courage and strength seemed to desert them.
as he came about level with the pit, he paused, and turned his face full upon the lads.
""mary be my shield!
he sees us!"
said matcham, faintly.
""hush!"
whispered dick.
""he doth but hearken.
he is blind, fool!"
the leper looked or listened, whichever he was really doing, for some seconds.
then he began to move on again, but presently paused once more, and again turned and seemed to gaze upon the lads.
even dick became dead-white and closed his eyes, as if by the mere sight he might become infected.
but soon the bell sounded, and this time, without any farther hesitation, the leper crossed the remainder of the little heath and disappeared into the covert of the woods.
""he saw us," said matcham.
""i could swear it!"
""tut!"
returned dick, recovering some sparks of courage.
""he but heard us.
he was in fear, poor soul!
an ye were blind, and walked in a perpetual night, ye would start yourself, if ever a twig rustled or a bird cried "peep.""
""dick, good dick, he saw us," repeated matcham.
""when a man hearkeneth, he doth not as this man; he doth otherwise, dick.
this was seeing; it was not hearing.
he means foully.
hark, else, if his bell be not stopped!"
such was the case.
the bell rang no longer.
""nay," said dick, "i like not that.
nay," he cried again, "i like that little.
what may this betoken?
let us go, by the mass!"
""he hath gone east," added matcham.
""good dick, let us go westward straight; i shall not breathe till i have my back turned upon that leper."
""jack, y" are too cowardly," replied dick.
""we shall go fair for holywood, or as fair, at least, as i can guide you, and that will be due north."
they were afoot at once, passed the stream upon some stepping-stones, and began to mount on the other side, which was steeper, towards the margin of the wood.
the ground became very uneven, full of knolls and hollows; trees grew scattered or in clumps; it became difficult to choose a path, and the lads somewhat wandered.
they were weary, besides, with yesterday's exertions and the lack of food, and they moved but heavily and dragged their feet among the sand.
presently, coming to the top of a knoll, they were aware of the leper, some hundred feet in front of them, crossing the line of their march by a hollow.
his bell was silent, his staff no longer tapped the ground, and he went before him with the swift and assured footsteps of a man who sees.
next moment he had disappeared into a little thicket.
the lads, at the first glimpse, had crouched behind a tuft of gorse; there they lay, horror-struck.
""certain, he pursueth us," said dick -- "certain!
he held the clapper of his bell in one hand, saw ye?
that it should not sound.
now may the saints aid and guide us, for i have no strength to combat pestilence!"
""what maketh he?"
cried matcham.
""what doth he want?
who ever heard the like, that a leper, out of mere malice, should pursue unfortunates?
hath he not his bell to that very end, that people may avoid him?
dick, there is below this something deeper."
""nay, i care not," moaned dick; "the strength is gone out of me; my legs are like water.
the saints be mine assistance!"
""would ye lie there idle?"
cried matcham.
""let us back into the open.
we have the better chance; he can not steal upon us unawares."
""not i," said dick.
""my time is come, and peradventure he may pass us by."
""bend me, then, your bow!"
cried the other.
""what!
will ye be a man?"
dick crossed himself.
""would ye have me shoot upon a leper?"
he cried.
""the hand would fail me.
nay, now," he added -- "nay, now, let be!
with sound men i will fight, but not with ghosts and lepers.
which this is, i wot not.
one or other, heaven be our protection!"
""now," said matcham, "if this be man's courage, what a poor thing is man!
but sith ye will do naught, let us lie close."
then came a single, broken jangle on the bell.
""he hath missed his hold upon the clapper," whispered matcham.
""saints!
how near he is!"
but dick answered never a word; his teeth were near chattering.
soon they saw a piece of the white robe between some bushes; then the leper's head was thrust forth from behind a trunk, and he seemed narrowly to scan the neighbourhood before he once again withdrew.
to their stretched senses, the whole bush appeared alive with rustlings and the creak of twigs; and they heard the beating of each other's heart.
suddenly, with a cry, the leper sprang into the open close by, and ran straight upon the lads.
they, shrieking aloud, separated and began to run different ways.
but their horrible enemy fastened upon matcham, ran him swiftly down, and had him almost instantly a prisoner.
the lad gave one scream that echoed high and far over the forest, he had one spasm of struggling, and then all his limbs relaxed, and he fell limp into his captor's arms.
dick heard the cry and turned.
he saw matcham fall; and on the instant his spirit and his strength revived; with a cry of pity and anger, he unslung and bent his arblast.
but ere he had time to shoot, the leper held up his hand.
""hold your shot, dickon!"
cried a familiar voice.
""hold your shot, mad wag!
know ye not a friend?"
and then laying down matcham on the turf, he undid the hood from off his face, and disclosed the features of sir daniel brackley.
""sir daniel!"
cried dick.
""ay, by the mass, sir daniel!"
returned the knight.
""would ye shoot upon your guardian, rogue?
but here is this" -- and there he broke off, and pointing to matcham, asked: "how call ye him, dick?"
""nay," said dick, "i call him master matcham.
know ye him not?
he said ye knew him!"
""ay," replied sir daniel, "i know the lad;" and he chuckled.
""but he has fainted; and, by my sooth, he might have had less to faint for!
hey, dick?
did i put the fear of death upon you?"
""indeed, sir daniel, ye did that," said dick, and sighed again at the mere recollection.
""nay, sir, saving your respect, i had as lief "a" met the devil in person; and to speak truth, i am yet all a-quake.
but what made ye, sir, in such a guise?"
sir daniel's brow grew suddenly black with anger.
""what made i?"
he said.
""ye do well to mind me of it!
what?
i skulked for my poor life in my own wood of tunstall, dick.
we were ill sped at the battle; we but got there to be swept among the rout.
where be all my good men-at-arms?
dick, by the mass, i know not!
we were swept down; the shot fell thick among us; i have not seen one man in my own colours since i saw three fall.
for myself, i came sound to shoreby, and being mindful of the black arrow, got me this gown and bell, and came softly by the path for the moat house.
there is no disguise to be compared with it; the jingle of this bell would scare me the stoutest outlaw in the forest; they would all turn pale to hear it.
at length i came by you and matcham.
i could see but evilly through this same hood, and was not sure of you, being chiefly, and for many a good cause, astonished at the finding you together.
moreover, in the open, where i had to go slowly and tap with my staff, i feared to disclose myself.
but see," he added, "this poor shrew begins a little to revive.
a little good canary will comfort me the heart of it."
the knight, from under his long dress, produced a stout bottle, and began to rub the temples and wet the lips of the patient, who returned gradually to consciousness, and began to roll dim eyes from one to another.
""what cheer, jack!"
said dick.
""it was no leper, after all; it was sir daniel!
see!"
""swallow me a good draught of this," said the knight.
""this will give you manhood.
thereafter, i will give you both a meal, and we shall all three on to tunstall.
for, dick," he continued, laying forth bread and meat upon the grass, "i will avow to you, in all good conscience, it irks me sorely to be safe between four walls.
not since i backed a horse have i been pressed so hard; peril of life, jeopardy of land and livelihood, and to sum up, all these losels in the wood to hunt me down.
but i be not yet shent.
some of my lads will pick me their way home.
hatch hath ten fellows; selden, he had six.
nay, we shall soon be strong again; and if i can but buy my peace with my right fortunate and undeserving lord of york, why, dick, we'll be a man again and go a-horseback!"
and so saying, the knight filled himself a horn of canary, and pledged his ward in dumb show.
""selden," dick faltered -- "selden" -- and he paused again.
sir daniel put down the wine untasted.
""how!"
he cried, in a changed voice.
""selden?
speak!
what of selden?"
dick stammered forth the tale of the ambush and the massacre.
the knight heard in silence; but as he listened, his countenance became convulsed with rage and grief.
""now here," he cried, "on my right hand, i swear to avenge it!
if that i fail, if that i spill not ten men's souls for each, may this hand wither from my body!
i broke this duckworth like a rush; i beggared him to his door; i burned the thatch above his head; i drove him from this country; and now, cometh he back to beard me?
nay, but, duckworth, this time it shall go bitter hard!"
he was silent for some time, his face working.
""eat!"
he cried, suddenly.
""and you here," he added to matcham, "swear me an oath to follow straight to the moat house."
""i will pledge mine honour," replied matcham.
""what make i with your honour?"
cried the knight.
""swear me upon your mother's welfare!"
matcham gave the required oath; and sir daniel re-adjusted the hood over his face, and prepared his bell and staff.
to see him once more in that appalling travesty somewhat revived the horror of his two companions.
but the knight was soon upon his feet.
""eat with despatch," he said, "and follow me yarely to mine house."
and with that he set forth again into the woods; and presently after the bell began to sound, numbering his steps, and the two lads sat by their untasted meal, and heard it die slowly away up hill into the distance.
""and so ye go to tunstall?"
dick inquired.
""yea, verily," said matcham, "when needs must!
i am braver behind sir daniel's back than to his face."
they ate hastily, and set forth along the path through the airy upper levels of the forest, where great beeches stood apart among green lawns, and the birds and squirrels made merry on the boughs.
two hours later, they began to descend upon the other side, and already, among the tree-tops, saw before them the red walls and roofs of tunstall house.
""here," said matcham, pausing, "ye shall take your leave of your friend jack, whom y" are to see no more.
come, dick, forgive him what he did amiss, as he, for his part, cheerfully and lovingly forgiveth you."
""and wherefore so?"
asked dick.
""an we both go to tunstall, i shall see you yet again, i trow, and that right often."
""ye'll never again see poor jack matcham," replied the other, "that was so fearful and burthensome, and yet plucked you from the river; ye'll not see him more, dick, by mine honour!"
he held his arms open, and the lads embraced and kissed.
""and, dick," continued matcham, "my spirit bodeth ill.
y" are now to see a new sir daniel; for heretofore hath all prospered in his hands exceedingly, and fortune followed him; but now, methinks, when his fate hath come upon him, and he runs the adventure of his life, he will prove but a foul lord to both of us.
he may be brave in battle, but he hath the liar's eye; there is fear in his eye, dick, and fear is as cruel as the wolf!
we go down into that house, saint mary guide us forth again!"
and so they continued their descent in silence, and came out at last before sir daniel's forest stronghold, where it stood, low and shady, flanked with round towers and stained with moss and lichen, in the lilied waters of the moat.
even as they appeared, the doors were opened, the bridge lowered, and sir daniel himself, with hatch and the parson at his side, stood ready to receive them.
book ii -- the moat house chapter i -- dick asks questions the moat house stood not far from the rough forest road.
externally, it was a compact rectangle of red stone, flanked at each corner by a round tower, pierced for archery and battlemented at the top.
within, it enclosed a narrow court.
the moat was perhaps twelve feet wide, crossed by a single drawbridge.
it was supplied with water by a trench, leading to a forest pool and commanded, through its whole length, from the battlements of the two southern towers.
except that one or two tall and thick trees had been suffered to remain within half a bowshot of the walls, the house was in a good posture for defence.
in the court, dick found a part of the garrison, busy with preparations for defence, and gloomily discussing the chances of a siege.
some were making arrows, some sharpening swords that had long been disused; but even as they worked, they shook their heads.
twelve of sir daniel's party had escaped the battle, run the gauntlet through the wood, and come alive to the moat house.
but out of this dozen, three had been gravely wounded: two at risingham in the disorder of the rout, one by john amend-all's marksmen as he crossed the forest.
this raised the force of the garrison, counting hatch, sir daniel, and young shelton, to twenty-two effective men.
and more might be continually expected to arrive.
the danger lay not therefore in the lack of men.
it was the terror of the black arrow that oppressed the spirits of the garrison.
for their open foes of the party of york, in these most changing times, they felt but a far-away concern.
""the world," as people said in those days, "might change again" before harm came.
but for their neighbours in the wood, they trembled.
it was not sir daniel alone who was a mark for hatred.
his men, conscious of impunity, had carried themselves cruelly through all the country.
harsh commands had been harshly executed; and of the little band that now sat talking in the court, there was not one but had been guilty of some act of oppression or barbarity.
and now, by the fortune of war, sir daniel had become powerless to protect his instruments; now, by the issue of some hours of battle, at which many of them had not been present, they had all become punishable traitors to the state, outside the buckler of the law, a shrunken company in a poor fortress that was hardly tenable, and exposed upon all sides to the just resentment of their victims.
nor had there been lacking grisly advertisements of what they might expect.
at different periods of the evening and the night, no fewer than seven riderless horses had come neighing in terror to the gate.
two were from selden's troop; five belonged to men who had ridden with sir daniel to the field.
lastly, a little before dawn, a spearman had come staggering to the moat side, pierced by three arrows; even as they carried him in, his spirit had departed; but by the words that he uttered in his agony, he must have been the last survivor of a considerable company of men.
hatch himself showed, under his sun-brown, the pallour of anxiety; and when he had taken dick aside and learned the fate of selden, he fell on a stone bench and fairly wept.
the others, from where they sat on stools or doorsteps in the sunny angle of the court, looked at him with wonder and alarm, but none ventured to inquire the cause of his emotion.
""nay, master shelton," said hatch, at last -- "nay, but what said i?
we shall all go.
selden was a man of his hands; he was like a brother to me.
well, he has gone second; well, we shall all follow!
for what said their knave rhyme?
--" a black arrow in each black heart."
was it not so it went?
appleyard, selden, smith, old humphrey gone; and there lieth poor john carter, crying, poor sinner, for the priest."
dick gave ear.
out of a low window, hard by where they were talking, groans and murmurs came to his ear.
""lieth he there?"
he asked.
""ay, in the second porter's chamber," answered hatch.
""we could not bear him further, soul and body were so bitterly at odds.
at every step we lifted him, he thought to wend.
but now, methinks, it is the soul that suffereth.
ever for the priest he crieth, and sir oliver, i wot not why, still cometh not.
""sir daniel," he said, "here is a right intricate affair, the which, with your good leave, it shall be mine to examine and adjust.
content ye, then; your business is in careful hands; justice shall be done you; and in the meanwhile, get ye incontinently home, and have your hurts attended.
the air is shrewd, and i would not ye took cold upon these scratches."
he made a sign with his hand; it was passed down the nave by obsequious servants, who waited there upon his smallest gesture.
instantly, without the church, a tucket sounded shrill, and through the open portal archers and men-at-arms, uniformly arrayed in the colours and wearing the badge of lord risingham, began to file into the church, took dick and lawless from those who still detained them, and, closing their files about the prisoners, marched forth again and disappeared.
as they were passing, joanna held both her hands to dick and cried him her farewell; and the bridesmaid, nothing downcast by her uncle's evident displeasure, blew him a kiss, with a "keep your heart up, lion-driver!"
that for the first time since the accident called up a smile to the faces of the crowd.
chapter v -- earl risingham earl risingham, although by far the most important person then in shoreby, was poorly lodged in the house of a private gentleman upon the extreme outskirts of the town.
nothing but the armed men at the doors, and the mounted messengers that kept arriving and departing, announced the temporary residence of a great lord.
thus it was that, from lack of space, dick and lawless were clapped into the same apartment.
""well spoken, master richard," said the outlaw; "it was excellently well spoken, and, for my part, i thank you cordially.
here we are in good hands; we shall be justly tried, and, some time this evening, decently hanged on the same tree."
""indeed, my poor friend, i do believe it," answered dick.
""yet have we a string to our bow," returned lawless.
""ellis duckworth is a man out of ten thousand; he holdeth you right near his heart, both for your own and for your father's sake; and knowing you guiltless of this fact, he will stir earth and heaven to bear you clear."
""it may not be," said dick.
""what can he do?
he hath but a handful.
alack, if it were but to-morrow -- could i but keep a certain tryst an hour before noon to-morrow -- all were, i think, otherwise.
but now there is no help."
""well," concluded lawless, "an ye will stand to it for my innocence, i will stand to it for yours, and that stoutly.
it shall naught avail us; but an i be to hang, it shall not be for lack of swearing."
and then, while dick gave himself over to his reflections, the old rogue curled himself down into a corner, pulled his monkish hood about his face, and composed himself to sleep.
soon he was loudly snoring, so utterly had his long life of hardship and adventure blunted the sense of apprehension.
it was long after noon, and the day was already failing, before the door was opened and dick taken forth and led up-stairs to where, in a warm cabinet, earl risingham sat musing over the fire.
on his captive's entrance he looked up.
""sir," he said, "i knew your father, who was a man of honour, and this inclineth me to be the more lenient; but i may not hide from you that heavy charges lie against your character.
ye do consort with murderers and robbers; upon a clear probation ye have carried war against the king's peace; ye are suspected to have piratically seized upon a ship; ye are found skulking with a counterfeit presentment in your enemy's house; a man is slain that very evening --" "an it like you, my lord," dick interposed, "i will at once avow my guilt, such as it is.
i slew this fellow rutter; and to the proof" -- searching in his bosom -- "here is a letter from his wallet."
lord risingham took the letter, and opened and read it twice.
""ye have read this?"
he inquired.
""i have read it," answered dick.
""are ye for york or lancaster?"
the earl demanded.
""my lord, it was but a little while back that i was asked that question, and knew not how to answer it," said dick; "but having answered once, i will not vary.
my lord, i am for york."
the earl nodded approvingly.
""honestly replied," he said.
""but wherefore, then, deliver me this letter?"
""nay, but against traitors, my lord, are not all sides arrayed?"
cried dick.
""i would they were, young gentleman," returned the earl; "and i do at least approve your saying.
there is more youth than guile in you, i do perceive; and were not sir daniel a mighty man upon our side, i were half-tempted to espouse your quarrel.
for i have inquired, and it appears ye have been hardly dealt with, and have much excuse.
but look ye, sir, i am, before all else, a leader in the queen's interest; and though by nature a just man, as i believe, and leaning even to the excess of mercy, yet must i order my goings for my party's interest, and, to keep sir daniel, i would go far about."
""my lord," returned dick, "ye will think me very bold to counsel you; but do ye count upon sir daniel's faith?
methought he had changed sides intolerably often."
""nay, it is the way of england.
what would ye have?"
the earl demanded.
""but ye are unjust to the knight of tunstall; and as faith goes, in this unfaithful generation, he hath of late been honourably true to us of lancaster.
even in our last reverses he stood firm."
""an it pleased you, then," said dick, "to cast your eye upon this letter, ye might somewhat change your thought of him;" and he handed to the earl sir daniel's letter to lord wensleydale.
the effect upon the earl's countenance was instant; he lowered like an angry lion, and his hand, with a sudden movement, clutched at his dagger.
""ye have read this also?"
he asked.
""even so," said dick.
""it is your lordship's own estate he offers to lord wensleydale?"
""it is my own estate, even as ye say!"
returned the earl.
""i am your bedesman for this letter.
it hath shown me a fox's hole.
command me, master shelton; i will not be backward in gratitude, and to begin with, york or lancaster, true man or thief, i do now set you at freedom.
go, a mary's name!
but judge it right that i retain and hang your fellow, lawless.
the crime hath been most open, and it were fitting that some open punishment should follow."
""my lord, i make it my first suit to you to spare him also," pleaded dick.
""it is an old, condemned rogue, thief, and vagabond, master shelton," said the earl.
""he hath been gallows-ripe this score of years.
and, whether for one thing or another, whether to-morrow or the day after, where is the great choice?"
""yet, my lord, it was through love to me that he came hither," answered dick, "and i were churlish and thankless to desert him."
""master shelton, ye are troublesome," replied the earl, severely.
""it is an evil way to prosper in this world.
howbeit, and to be quit of your importunity, i will once more humour you.
go, then, together; but go warily, and get swiftly out of shoreby town.
for this sir daniel -lrb- whom may the saints confound! -rrb-
thirsteth most greedily to have your blood."
""my lord, i do now offer you in words my gratitude, trusting at some brief date to pay you some of it in service," replied dick, as he turned from the apartment.
chapter vi -- arblaster again when dick and lawless were suffered to steal, by a back way, out of the house where lord risingham held his garrison, the evening had already come.
they paused in shelter of the garden wall to consult on their best course.
the danger was extreme.
if one of sir daniel's men caught sight of them and raised the view-hallo, they would be run down and butchered instantly.
and not only was the town of shoreby a mere net of peril for their lives, but to make for the open country was to run the risk of the patrols.
a little way off, upon some open ground, they spied a windmill standing; and hard by that, a very large granary with open doors.
""how if we lay there until the night fall?"
dick proposed.
and lawless having no better suggestion to offer, they made a straight push for the granary at a run, and concealed themselves behind the door among some straw.
the daylight rapidly departed; and presently the moon was silvering the frozen snow.
now or never was their opportunity to gain the goat and bagpipes unobserved and change their tell-tale garments.
yet even then it was advisable to go round by the outskirts, and not run the gauntlet of the market-place, where, in the concourse of people, they stood the more imminent peril to be recognised and slain.
this course was a long one.
it took them not far from the house by the beach, now lying dark and silent, and brought them forth at last by the margin of the harbour.
many of the ships, as they could see by the clear moonshine, had weighed anchor, and, profiting by the calm sky, proceeded for more distant parts; answerably to this, the rude alehouses along the beach -lrb- although in defiance of the curfew law, they still shone with fire and candle -rrb- were no longer thronged with customers, and no longer echoed to the chorus of sea-songs.
hastily, half-running, with their monkish raiment kilted to the knee, they plunged through the deep snow and threaded the labyrinth of marine lumber; and they were already more than half way round the harbour when, as they were passing close before an alehouse, the door suddenly opened and let out a gush of light upon their fleeting figures.
instantly they stopped, and made believe to be engaged in earnest conversation.
three men, one after another, came out of the ale-house, and the last closed the door behind him.
all three were unsteady upon their feet, as if they had passed the day in deep potations, and they now stood wavering in the moonlight, like men who knew not what they would be after.
the tallest of the three was talking in a loud, lamentable voice.
""seven pieces of as good gascony as ever a tapster broached," he was saying, "the best ship out o" the port o" dartmouth, a virgin mary parcel-gilt, thirteen pounds of good gold money --" "i have bad losses, too," interrupted one of the others.
""i have had losses of mine own, gossip arblaster.
i was robbed at martinmas of five shillings and a leather wallet well worth ninepence farthing."
dick's heart smote him at what he heard.
until that moment he had not perhaps thought twice of the poor skipper who had been ruined by the loss of the good hope; so careless, in those days, were men who wore arms of the goods and interests of their inferiors.
but this sudden encounter reminded him sharply of the high-handed manner and ill-ending of his enterprise; and both he and lawless turned their heads the other way, to avoid the chance of recognition.
the ship's dog had, however, made his escape from the wreck and found his way back again to shoreby.
he was now at arblaster's heels, and suddenly sniffing and pricking his ears, he darted forward and began to bark furiously at the two sham friars.
his master unsteadily followed him.
""hey, shipmates!"
he cried.
""have ye ever a penny pie for a poor old shipman, clean destroyed by pirates?
i am a man that would have paid for you both o" thursday morning; and now here i be, o" saturday night, begging for a flagon of ale!
ask my man tom, if ye misdoubt me.
seven pieces of good gascon wine, a ship that was mine own, and was my father's before me, a blessed mary of plane-tree wood and parcel-gilt, and thirteen pounds in gold and silver.
hey!
what say ye?
a man that fought the french, too; for i have fought the french; i have cut more french throats upon the high seas than ever a man that sails out of dartmouth.
come, a penny piece."
neither dick nor lawless durst answer him a word, lest he should recognise their voices; and they stood there as helpless as a ship ashore, not knowing where to turn nor what to hope.
""are ye dumb, boy?"
inquired the skipper.
""mates," he added, with a hiccup, "they be dumb.
i like not this manner of discourtesy; for an a man be dumb, so be as he's courteous, he will still speak when he was spoken to, methinks."
by this time the sailor, tom, who was a man of great personal strength, seemed to have conceived some suspicion of these two speechless figures; and being soberer than his captain, stepped suddenly before him, took lawless roughly by the shoulder, and asked him, with an oath, what ailed him that he held his tongue.
to this the outlaw, thinking all was over, made answer by a wrestling feint that stretched the sailor on the sand, and, calling upon dick to follow him, took to his heels among the lumber.
the affair passed in a second.
before dick could run at all, arblaster had him in his arms; tom, crawling on his face, had caught him by one foot, and the third man had a drawn cutlass brandishing above his head.
it was not so much the danger, it was not so much the annoyance, that now bowed down the spirits of young shelton; it was the profound humiliation to have escaped sir daniel, convinced lord risingham, and now fall helpless in the hands of this old, drunken sailor; and not merely helpless, but, as his conscience loudly told him when it was too late, actually guilty -- actually the bankrupt debtor of the man whose ship he had stolen and lost.
""bring me him back into the alehouse, till i see his face," said arblaster.
""nay, nay," returned tom; "but let us first unload his wallet, lest the other lads cry share."
but though he was searched from head to foot, not a penny was found upon him; nothing but lord foxham's signet, which they plucked savagely from his finger.
""turn me him to the moon," said the skipper; and taking dick by the chin, he cruelly jerked his head into the air.
""blessed virgin!"
he cried, "it is the pirate!"
""hey!"
cried tom.
""by the virgin of bordeaux, it is the man himself!"
repeated arblaster.
""what, sea-thief, do i hold you?"
he cried.
""where is my ship?
where is my wine?
hey!
have i you in my hands?
tom, give me one end of a cord here; i will so truss me this sea-thief, hand and foot together, like a basting turkey -- marry, i will so bind him up -- and thereafter i will so beat -- so beat him!"
and so he ran on, winding the cord meanwhile about dick's limbs with the dexterity peculiar to seamen, and at every turn and cross securing it with a knot, and tightening the whole fabric with a savage pull.
when he had done, the lad was a mere package in his hands -- as helpless as the dead.
the skipper held him at arm's length, and laughed aloud.
then he fetched him a stunning buffet on the ear; and then turned him about, and furiously kicked and kicked him.
anger rose up in dick's bosom like a storm; anger strangled him, and he thought to have died; but when the sailor, tired of this cruel play, dropped him all his length upon the sand and turned to consult with his companions, he instantly regained command of his temper.
here was a momentary respite; ere they began again to torture him, he might have found some method to escape from this degrading and fatal misadventure.
presently, sure enough, and while his captors were still discussing what to do with him, he took heart of grace, and, with a pretty steady voice, addressed them.
""my masters," he began, "are ye gone clean foolish?
here hath heaven put into your hands as pretty an occasion to grow rich as ever shipman had -- such as ye might make thirty over-sea adventures and not find again -- and, by the mass i what do ye?
beat me?
-- nay; so would an angry child!
but for long-headed tarry-johns, that fear not fire nor water, and that love gold as they love beef, methinks ye are not wise."
""ay," said tom, "now y" are trussed ye would cozen us."
""cozen you!"
repeated dick.
""nay, if ye be fools, it would be easy.
but if ye be shrewd fellows, as i trow ye are, ye can see plainly where your interest lies.
when i took your ship from you, we were many, we were well clad and armed; but now, bethink you a little, who mustered that array?
one incontestably that hath much gold.
and if he, being already rich, continueth to hunt after more even in the face of storms -- bethink you once more -- shall there not be a treasure somewhere hidden?"
""what meaneth he?"
asked one of the men.
""why, if ye have lost an old skiff and a few jugs of vinegary wine," continued dick, "forget them, for the trash they are; and do ye rather buckle to an adventure worth the name, that shall, in twelve hours, make or mar you for ever.
but take me up from where i lie, and let us go somewhere near at hand and talk across a flagon, for i am sore and frozen, and my mouth is half among the snow."
""he seeks but to cozen us," said tom, contemptuously.
""cozen!
cozen!"
cried the third man.
""i would i could see the man that could cozen me!
he were a cozener indeed!
nay, i was not born yesterday.
i can see a church when it hath a steeple on it; and for my part, gossip arblaster, methinks there is some sense in this young man.
shall we go hear him, indeed?
say, shall we go hear him?"
""i would look gladly on a pottle of strong ale, good master pirret," returned arblaster.
""how say ye, tom?
but then the wallet is empty."
""i will pay," said the other -- "i will pay.
i would fain see this matter out; i do believe, upon my conscience, there is gold in it."
""nay, if ye get again to drinking, all is lost!"
cried tom.
""gossip arblaster, ye suffer your fellow to have too much liberty," returned master pirret.
""would ye be led by a hired man?
fy, fy!"
""peace, fellow!"
said arblaster, addressing tom.
""will ye put your oar in?
truly a fine pass, when the crew is to correct the skipper!"
""well, then, go your way," said tom; "i wash my hands of you."
""set him, then, upon his feet," said master pirret.
""i know a privy place where we may drink and discourse."
""if i am to walk, my friends, ye must set my feet at liberty," said dick, when he had been once more planted upright like a post.
""he saith true," laughed pirret.
""truly, he could not walk accoutred as he is.
give it a slit -- out with your knife and slit it, gossip."
even arblaster paused at this proposal; but as his companion continued to insist, and dick had the sense to keep the merest wooden indifference of expression, and only shrugged his shoulders over the delay, the skipper consented at last, and cut the cords which tied his prisoner's feet and legs.
not only did this enable dick to walk; but the whole network of his bonds being proportionately loosened, he felt the arm behind his back begin to move more freely, and could hope, with time and trouble, to entirely disengage it.
so much he owed already to the owlish silliness and greed of master pirret.
that worthy now assumed the lead, and conducted them to the very same rude alehouse where lawless had taken arblaster on the day of the gale.
it was now quite deserted; the fire was a pile of red embers, radiating the most ardent heat; and when they had chosen their places, and the landlord had set before them a measure of mulled ale, both pirret and arblaster stretched forth their legs and squared their elbows like men bent upon a pleasant hour.
the table at which they sat, like all the others in the alehouse, consisted of a heavy, square board, set on a pair of barrels; and each of the four curiously-assorted cronies sat at one side of the square, pirret facing arblaster, and dick opposite to the common sailor.
""and now, young man," said pirret, "to your tale.
it doth appear, indeed, that ye have somewhat abused our gossip arblaster; but what then?
make it up to him -- show him but this chance to become wealthy -- and i will go pledge he will forgive you."
so far dick had spoken pretty much at random; but it was now necessary, under the supervision of six eyes, to invent and tell some marvellous story, and, if it were possible, get back into his hands the all-important signet.
to squander time was the first necessity.
the longer his stay lasted, the more would his captors drink, and the surer should he be when he attempted his escape.
well, dick was not much of an inventor, and what he told was pretty much the tale of ali baba, with shoreby and tunstall forest substituted for the east, and the treasures of the cavern rather exaggerated than diminished.
as the reader is aware, it is an excellent story, and has but one drawback -- that it is not true; and so, as these three simple shipmen now heard it for the first time, their eyes stood out of their faces, and their mouths gaped like codfish at a fishmonger's.
pretty soon a second measure of mulled ale was called for; and while dick was still artfully spinning out the incidents a third followed the second.
here was the position of the parties towards the end: arblaster, three-parts drunk and one-half asleep, hung helpless on his stool.
even tom had been much delighted with the tale, and his vigilance had abated in proportion.
meanwhile, dick had gradually wormed his right arm clear of its bonds, and was ready to risk all.
""and so," said pirret, "y" are one of these?"
""i was made so," replied dick, "against my will; but an i could but get a sack or two of gold coin to my share, i should be a fool indeed to continue dwelling in a filthy cave, and standing shot and buffet like a soldier.
here be we four; good!
let us, then, go forth into the forest to-morrow ere the sun be up.
could we come honestly by a donkey, it were better; but an we can not, we have our four strong backs, and i warrant me we shall come home staggering."
pirret licked his lips.
""and this magic," he said -- "this password, whereby the cave is opened -- how call ye it, friend?"
""nay, none know the word but the three chiefs," returned dick; "but here is your great good fortune, that, on this very evening, i should be the bearer of a spell to open it.
it is a thing not trusted twice a year beyond the captain's wallet."
""a spell!"
said arblaster, half awakening, and squinting upon dick with one eye.
""aroint thee!
no spells!
i be a good christian.
ask my man tom, else."
""nay, but this is white magic," said dick.
""it doth naught with the devil; only the powers of numbers, herbs, and planets."
""ay, ay," said pirret;"'t is but white magic, gossip.
there is no sin therein, i do assure you.
but proceed, good youth.
this spell -- in what should it consist?"
""nay, that i will incontinently show you," answered dick.
""have ye there the ring ye took from my finger?
good!
now hold it forth before you by the extreme finger-ends, at the arm's - length, and over against the shining of these embers.
't is so exactly.
thus, then, is the spell."
with a haggard glance, dick saw the coast was clear between him and the door.
he put up an internal prayer.
then whipping forth his arm, he made but one snatch of the ring, and at the same instant, levering up the table, he sent it bodily over upon the seaman tom.
he, poor soul, went down bawling under the ruins; and before arblaster understood that anything was wrong, or pirret could collect his dazzled wits, dick had run to the door and escaped into the moonlit night.
the moon, which now rode in the mid-heavens, and the extreme whiteness of the snow, made the open ground about the harbour bright as day; and young shelton leaping, with kilted robe, among the lumber, was a conspicuous figure from afar.
tom and pirret followed him with shouts; from every drinking-shop they were joined by others whom their cries aroused; and presently a whole fleet of sailors was in full pursuit.
but jack ashore was a bad runner, even in the fifteenth century, and dick, besides, had a start, which he rapidly improved, until, as he drew near the entrance of a narrow lane, he even paused and looked laughingly behind him.
upon the white floor of snow, all the shipmen of shoreby came clustering in an inky mass, and tailing out rearward in isolated clumps.
every man was shouting or screaming; every man was gesticulating with both arms in air; some one was continually falling; and to complete the picture, when one fell, a dozen would fall upon the top of him.
the confused mass of sound which they rolled up as high as to the moon was partly comical and partly terrifying to the fugitive whom they were hunting.
in itself, it was impotent, for he made sure no seaman in the port could run him down.
but the mere volume of noise, in so far as it must awake all the sleepers in shoreby and bring all the skulking sentries to the street, did really threaten him with danger in the front.
so, spying a dark doorway at a corner, he whipped briskly into it, and let the uncouth hunt go by him, still shouting and gesticulating, and all red with hurry and white with tumbles in the snow.
it was a long while, indeed, before this great invasion of the town by the harbour came to an end, and it was long before silence was restored.
for long, lost sailors were still to be heard pounding and shouting through the streets in all directions and in every quarter of the town.
quarrels followed, sometimes among themselves, sometimes with the men of the patrols; knives were drawn, blows given and received, and more than one dead body remained behind upon the snow.
when, a full hour later, the last seaman returned grumblingly to the harbour side and his particular tavern, it may fairly be questioned if he had ever known what manner of man he was pursuing, but it was absolutely sure that he had now forgotten.
by next morning there were many strange stories flying; and a little while after, the legend of the devil's nocturnal visit was an article of faith with all the lads of shoreby.
but the return of the last seaman did not, even yet, set free young shelton from his cold imprisonment in the doorway.
for some time after, there was a great activity of patrols; and special parties came forth to make the round of the place and report to one or other of the great lords, whose slumbers had been thus unusually broken.
the night was already well spent before dick ventured from his hiding-place and came, safe and sound, but aching with cold and bruises, to the door of the goat and bagpipes.
as the law required, there was neither fire nor candle in the house; but he groped his way into a corner of the icy guest-room, found an end of a blanket, which he hitched around his shoulders, and creeping close to the nearest sleeper, was soon lost in slumber.
book v -- crookback chapter i -- the shrill trumpet very early the next morning, before the first peep of the day, dick arose, changed his garments, armed himself once more like a gentleman, and set forth for lawless's den in the forest.
there, it will be remembered, he had left lord foxham's papers; and to get these and be back in time for the tryst with the young duke of gloucester could only be managed by an early start and the most vigorous walking.
the frost was more rigorous than ever; the air windless and dry, and stinging to the nostril.
the moon had gone down, but the stars were still bright and numerous, and the reflection from the snow was clear and cheerful.
there was no need for a lamp to walk by; nor, in that still but ringing air, the least temptation to delay.
dick had crossed the greater part of the open ground between shoreby and the forest, and had reached the bottom of the little hill, some hundred yards below the cross of st. bride, when, through the stillness of the black morn, there rang forth the note of a trumpet, so shrill, clear, and piercing, that he thought he had never heard the match of it for audibility.
it was blown once, and then hurriedly a second time; and then the clash of steel succeeded.
at this young shelton pricked his ears, and drawing his sword, ran forward up the hill.
presently he came in sight of the cross, and was aware of a most fierce encounter raging on the road before it.
there were seven or eight assailants, and but one to keep head against them; but so active and dexterous was this one, so desperately did he charge and scatter his opponents, so deftly keep his footing on the ice, that already, before dick could intervene, he had slain one, wounded another, and kept the whole in check.
still, it was by a miracle that he continued his defence, and at any moment, any accident, the least slip of foot or error of hand, his life would be a forfeit.
""hold ye well, sir!
here is help!"
cried richard; and forgetting that he was alone, and that the cry was somewhat irregular, "to the arrow!
to the arrow!"
he shouted, as he fell upon the rear of the assailants.
these were stout fellows also, for they gave not an inch at this surprise, but faced about, and fell with astonishing fury upon dick.
four against one, the steel flashed about him in the starlight; the sparks flew fiercely; one of the men opposed to him fell -- in the stir of the fight he hardly knew why; then he himself was struck across the head, and though the steel cap below his hood protected him, the blow beat him down upon one knee, with a brain whirling like a windmill sail.
meanwhile the man whom he had come to rescue, instead of joining in the conflict, had, on the first sign of intervention, leaped aback and blown again, and yet more urgently and loudly, on that same shrill-voiced trumpet that began the alarm.
next moment, indeed, his foes were on him, and he was once more charging and fleeing, leaping, stabbing, dropping to his knee, and using indifferently sword and dagger, foot and hand, with the same unshaken courage and feverish energy and speed.
but that ear-piercing summons had been heard at last.
there was a muffled rushing in the snow; and in a good hour for dick, who saw the sword-points glitter already at his throat, there poured forth out of the wood upon both sides a disorderly torrent of mounted men-at-arms, each cased in iron, and with visor lowered, each bearing his lance in rest, or his sword bared and raised, and each carrying, so to speak, a passenger, in the shape of an archer or page, who leaped one after another from their perches, and had presently doubled the array.
the original assailants; seeing themselves outnumbered and surrounded, threw down their arms without a word.
""seize me these fellows!"
said the hero of the trumpet; and when his order had been obeyed, he drew near to dick and looked him in the face.
dick, returning this scrutiny, was surprised to find in one who had displayed such strength, skill and energy, a lad no older than himself -- slightly deformed, with one shoulder higher than the other, and of a pale, painful, and distorted countenance.
-lcb- 2 -rcb- the eyes, however, were very clear and bold.
""sir," said this lad, "ye came in good time for me, and none too early."
""my lord," returned dick, with a faint sense that he was in the presence of a great personage, "ye are yourself so marvellous a good swordsman that i believe ye had managed them single-handed.
howbeit, it was certainly well for me that your men delayed no longer than they did."
""how knew ye who i was?"
demanded the stranger.
""even now, my lord," dick answered, "i am ignorant of whom i speak with."
""is it so?"
asked the other.
""and yet ye threw yourself head first into this unequal battle."
""i saw one man valiantly contending against many," replied dick, "and i had thought myself dishonoured not to bear him aid."
a singular sneer played about the young nobleman's mouth as he made answer: "these are very brave words.
but to the more essential -- are ye lancaster or york?"
""my lord, i make no secret; i am clear for york," dick answered.
""by the mass!"
replied the other, "it is well for you."
and so saying, he turned towards one of his followers.
""let me see," he continued, in the same sneering and cruel tones -- "let me see a clean end of these brave gentlemen.
truss me them up."
there were but five survivors of the attacking party.
archers seized them by the arms; they were hurried to the borders of the wood, and each placed below a tree of suitable dimension; the rope was adjusted; an archer, carrying the end of it, hastily clambered overhead; and before a minute was over, and without a word passing upon either hand, the five men were swinging by the neck.
""and now," cried the deformed leader, "back to your posts, and when i summon you next, be readier to attend."
""my lord duke," said one man, "beseech you, tarry not here alone.
keep but a handful of lances at your hand."
""fellow," said the duke, "i have forborne to chide you for your slowness.
cross me not, therefore.
i trust my hand and arm, for all that i be crooked.
ye were backward when the trumpet sounded; and ye are now too forward with your counsels.
but it is ever so; last with the lance and first with tongue.
let it be reversed."
and with a gesture that was not without a sort of dangerous nobility, he waved them off.
the footmen climbed again to their seats behind the men-at-arms, and the whole party moved slowly away and disappeared in twenty different directions, under the cover of the forest.
the day was by this time beginning to break, and the stars to fade.
the first grey glimmer of dawn shone upon the countenances of the two young men, who now turned once more to face each other.
""here," said the duke, "ye have seen my vengeance, which is, like my blade, both sharp and ready.
but i would not have you, for all christendom, suppose me thankless.
you that came to my aid with a good sword and a better courage -- unless that ye recoil from my misshapenness -- come to my heart."
and so saying, the young leader held out his arms for an embrace.
in the bottom of his heart dick already entertained a great terror and some hatred for the man whom he had rescued; but the invitation was so worded that it would not have been merely discourteous, but cruel, to refuse or hesitate; and he hastened to comply.
""and now, my lord duke," he said, when he had regained his freedom, "do i suppose aright?
are ye my lord duke of gloucester?"
""i am richard of gloucester," returned the other.
""and you -- how call they you?"
dick told him his name, and presented lord foxham's signet, which the duke immediately recognised.
""ye come too soon," he said; "but why should i complain?
ye are like me, that was here at watch two hours before the day.
but this is the first sally of mine arms; upon this adventure, master shelton, shall i make or mar the quality of my renown.
there lie mine enemies, under two old, skilled captains -- risingham and brackley -- well posted for strength, i do believe, but yet upon two sides without retreat, enclosed betwixt the sea, the harbour, and the river.
methinks, shelton, here were a great blow to be stricken, an we could strike it silently and suddenly."
""i do think so, indeed," cried dick, warming.
""have ye my lord foxham's notes?"
inquired the duke.
and then, dick, having explained how he was without them for the moment, made himself bold to offer information every jot as good, of his own knowledge.
""and for mine own part, my lord duke," he added, "an ye had men enough, i would fall on even at this present.
for, look ye, at the peep of day the watches of the night are over; but by day they keep neither watch nor ward -- only scour the outskirts with horsemen.
now, then, when the night watch is already unarmed, and the rest are at their morning cup -- now were the time to break them."
""how many do ye count?"
asked gloucester.
""they number not two thousand," dick replied.
""i have seven hundred in the woods behind us," said the duke; "seven hundred follow from kettley, and will be here anon; behind these, and further, are four hundred more; and my lord foxham hath five hundred half a day from here, at holywood.
shall we attend their coming, or fall on?"
""my lord," said dick, "when ye hanged these five poor rogues ye did decide the question.
churls although they were, in these uneasy, times they will be lacked and looked for, and the alarm be given.
therefore, my lord, if ye do count upon the advantage of a surprise, ye have not, in my poor opinion, one whole hour in front of you."
""i do think so indeed," returned crookback.
""well, before an hour, ye shall be in the thick o n't, winning spurs.
a swift man to holywood, carrying lord foxham's signet; another along the road to speed my laggards!
nay, shelton, by the rood, it may be done!"
therewith he once more set his trumpet to his lips and blew.
this time he was not long kept waiting.
in a moment the open space about the cross was filled with horse and foot.
richard of gloucester took his place upon the steps, and despatched messenger after messenger to hasten the concentration of the seven hundred men that lay hidden in the immediate neighbourhood among the woods; and before a quarter of an hour had passed, all his dispositions being taken, he put himself at their head, and began to move down the hill towards shoreby.
his plan was simple.
he was to seize a quarter of the town of shoreby lying on the right hand of the high road, and make his position good there in the narrow lanes until his reinforcements followed.
if lord risingham chose to retreat, richard would follow upon his rear, and take him between two fires; or, if he preferred to hold the town, he would be shut in a trap, there to be gradually overwhelmed by force of numbers.
there was but one danger, but that was imminent and great -- gloucester's seven hundred might be rolled up and cut to pieces in the first encounter, and, to avoid this, it was needful to make the surprise of their arrival as complete as possible.
the footmen, therefore, were all once more taken up behind the riders, and dick had the signal honour meted out to him of mounting behind gloucester himself.
for as far as there was any cover the troops moved slowly, and when they came near the end of the trees that lined the highway, stopped to breathe and reconnoitre.
the sun was now well up, shining with a frosty brightness out of a yellow halo, and right over against the luminary, shoreby, a field of snowy roofs and ruddy gables, was rolling up its columns of morning smoke.
gloucester turned round to dick.
""in that poor place," he said, "where people are cooking breakfast, either you shall gain your spurs and i begin a life of mighty honour and glory in the world's eye, or both of us, as i conceive it, shall fall dead and be unheard of.
two richards are we.
well, then, richard shelton, they shall be heard about, these two!
their swords shall not ring more loudly on men's helmets than their names shall ring in people's ears."
dick was astonished at so great a hunger after fame, expressed with so great vehemence of voice and language, and he answered very sensibly and quietly, that, for his part, he promised he would do his duty, and doubted not of victory if everyone did the like.
by this time the horses were well breathed, and the leader holding up his sword and giving rein, the whole troop of chargers broke into the gallop and thundered, with their double load of fighting men, down the remainder of the hill and across the snow-covered plain that still divided them from shoreby.
chapter ii -- the battle of shoreby the whole distance to be crossed was not above a quarter of a mile.
but they had no sooner debauched beyond the cover of the trees than they were aware of people fleeing and screaming in the snowy meadows upon either hand.
almost at the same moment a great rumour began to arise, and spread and grow continually louder in the town; and they were not yet halfway to the nearest house before the bells began to ring backward from the steeple.
the young duke ground his teeth together.
by these so early signals of alarm he feared to find his enemies prepared; and if he failed to gain a footing in the town, he knew that his small party would soon be broken and exterminated in the open.
in the town, however, the lancastrians were far from being in so good a posture.
it was as dick had said.
the night-guard had already doffed their harness; the rest were still hanging -- unlatched, unbraced, all unprepared for battle -- about their quarters; and in the whole of shoreby there were not, perhaps, fifty men full armed, or fifty chargers ready to be mounted.
the beating of the bells, the terrifying summons of men who ran about the streets crying and beating upon the doors, aroused in an incredibly short space at least two score out of that half hundred.
these got speedily to horse, and, the alarm still flying wild and contrary, galloped in different directions.
thus it befell that, when richard of gloucester reached the first house of shoreby, he was met in the mouth of the street by a mere handful of lances, whom he swept before his onset as the storm chases the bark.
a hundred paces into the town, dick shelton touched the duke's arm; the duke, in answer, gathered his reins, put the shrill trumpet to his mouth, and blowing a concerted point, turned to the right hand out of the direct advance.
swerving like a single rider, his whole command turned after him, and, still at the full gallop of the chargers, swept up the narrow bye-street.
only the last score of riders drew rein and faced about in the entrance; the footmen, whom they carried behind them, leapt at the same instant to the earth, and began, some to bend their bows, and others to break into and secure the houses upon either hand.
surprised at this sudden change of direction, and daunted by the firm front of the rear-guard, the few lancastrians, after a momentary consultation, turned and rode farther into town to seek for reinforcements.
the quarter of the town upon which, by the advice of dick, richard of gloucester had now seized, consisted of five small streets of poor and ill-inhabited houses, occupying a very gentle eminence, and lying open towards the back.
the five streets being each secured by a good guard, the reserve would thus occupy the centre, out of shot, and yet ready to carry aid wherever it was needed.
such was the poorness of the neighbourhood that none of the lancastrian lords, and but few of their retainers, had been lodged therein; and the inhabitants, with one accord, deserted their houses and fled, squalling, along the streets or over garden walls.
in the centre, where the five ways all met, a somewhat ill-favoured alehouse displayed the sign of the chequers; and here the duke of gloucester chose his headquarters for the day.
to dick he assigned the guard of one of the five streets.
""go," he said, "win your spurs.
win glory for me: one richard for another.
i tell you, if i rise, ye shall rise by the same ladder.
go," he added, shaking him by the hand.
but, as soon as dick was gone, he turned to a little shabby archer at his elbow.
""go, dutton, and that right speedily," he added.
""follow that lad.
if ye find him faithful, ye answer for his safety, a head for a head.
woe unto you, if ye return without him!
but if he be faithless -- or, for one instant, ye misdoubt him -- stab him from behind."
in the meanwhile dick hastened to secure his post.
the street he had to guard was very narrow, and closely lined with houses, which projected and overhung the roadway; but narrow and dark as it was, since it opened upon the market-place of the town, the main issue of the battle would probably fall to be decided on that spot.
the market-place was full of townspeople fleeing in disorder; but there was as yet no sign of any foeman ready to attack, and dick judged he had some time before him to make ready his defence.
the two houses at the end stood deserted, with open doors, as the inhabitants had left them in their flight, and from these he had the furniture hastily tossed forth and piled into a barrier in the entry of the lane.
a hundred men were placed at his disposal, and of these he threw the more part into the houses, where they might lie in shelter and deliver their arrows from the windows.
with the rest, under his own immediate eye, he lined the barricade.
meanwhile the utmost uproar and confusion had continued to prevail throughout the town; and what with the hurried clashing of bells, the sounding of trumpets, the swift movement of bodies of horse, the cries of the commanders, and the shrieks of women, the noise was almost deafening to the ear.
presently, little by little, the tumult began to subside; and soon after, files of men in armour and bodies of archers began to assemble and form in line of battle in the market-place.
a large portion of this body were in murrey and blue, and in the mounted knight who ordered their array dick recognised sir daniel brackley.
then there befell a long pause, which was followed by the almost simultaneous sounding of four trumpets from four different quarters of the town.
a fifth rang in answer from the market-place, and at the same moment the files began to move, and a shower of arrows rattled about the barricade, and sounded like blows upon the walls of the two flanking houses.
the attack had begun, by a common signal, on all the five issues of the quarter.
gloucester was beleaguered upon every side; and dick judged, if he would make good his post, he must rely entirely on the hundred men of his command.
seven volleys of arrows followed one upon the other, and in the very thick of the discharges dick was touched from behind upon the arm, and found a page holding out to him a leathern jack, strengthened with bright plates of mail.
""it is from my lord of gloucester," said the page.
""he hath observed, sir richard, that ye went unarmed."
dick, with a glow at his heart at being so addressed, got to his feet and, with the assistance of the page, donned the defensive coat.
even as he did so, two arrows rattled harmlessly upon the plates, and a third struck down the page, mortally wounded, at his feet.
meantime the whole body of the enemy had been steadily drawing nearer across the market-place; and by this time were so close at hand that dick gave the order to return their shot.
immediately, from behind the barrier and from the windows of the houses, a counterblast of arrows sped, carrying death.
but the lancastrians, as if they had but waited for a signal, shouted loudly in answer; and began to close at a run upon the barrier, the horsemen still hanging back, with visors lowered.
then followed an obstinate and deadly struggle, hand to hand.
the assailants, wielding their falchions with one hand, strove with the other to drag down the structure of the barricade.
on the other side, the parts were reversed; and the defenders exposed themselves like madmen to protect their rampart.
so for some minutes the contest raged almost in silence, friend and foe falling one upon another.
but it is always the easier to destroy; and when a single note upon the tucket recalled the attacking party from this desperate service, much of the barricade had been removed piecemeal, and the whole fabric had sunk to half its height, and tottered to a general fall.
and now the footmen in the market-place fell back, at a run, on every side.
the horsemen, who had been standing in a line two deep, wheeled suddenly, and made their flank into their front; and as swift as a striking adder, the long, steel-clad column was launched upon the ruinous barricade.
of the first two horsemen, one fell, rider and steed, and was ridden down by his companions.
the second leaped clean upon the summit of the rampart, transpiercing an archer with his lance.
almost in the same instant he was dragged from the saddle and his horse despatched.
and then the full weight and impetus of the charge burst upon and scattered the defenders.
the men-at-arms, surmounting their fallen comrades, and carried onward by the fury of their onslaught, dashed through dick's broken line and poured thundering up the lane beyond, as a stream bestrides and pours across a broken dam.
yet was the fight not over.
still, in the narrow jaws of the entrance, dick and a few survivors plied their bills like woodmen; and already, across the width of the passage, there had been formed a second, a higher, and a more effectual rampart of fallen men and disembowelled horses, lashing in the agonies of death.
baffled by this fresh obstacle, the remainder of the cavalry fell back; and as, at the sight of this movement, the flight of arrows redoubled from the casements of the houses, their retreat had, for a moment, almost degenerated into flight.
almost at the same time, those who had crossed the barricade and charged farther up the street, being met before the door of the chequers by the formidable hunchback and the whole reserve of the yorkists, began to come scattering backward, in the excess of disarray and terror.
dick and his fellows faced about, fresh men poured out of the houses; a cruel blast of arrows met the fugitives full in the face, while gloucester was already riding down their rear; in the inside of a minute and a half there was no living lancastrian in the street.
then, and not till then, did dick hold up his reeking blade and give the word to cheer.
meanwhile gloucester dismounted from his horse and came forward to inspect the post.
his face was as pale as linen; but his eyes shone in his head like some strange jewel, and his voice, when he spoke, was hoarse and broken with the exultation of battle and success.
he looked at the rampart, which neither friend nor foe could now approach without precaution, so fiercely did the horses struggle in the throes of death, and at the sight of that great carnage he smiled upon one side.
""despatch these horses," he said; "they keep you from your vantage.
richard shelton," he added, "ye have pleased me.
kneel."
the lancastrians had already resumed their archery, and the shafts fell thick in the mouth of the street; but the duke, minding them not at all, deliberately drew his sword and dubbed richard a knight upon the spot.
""and now, sir richard," he continued, "if that ye see lord risingham, send me an express upon the instant.
were it your last man, let me hear of it incontinently.
i had rather venture the post than lose my stroke at him.
for mark me, all of ye," he added, raising his voice, "if earl risingham fall by another hand than mine, i shall count this victory a defeat."
""my lord duke," said one of his attendants, "is your grace not weary of exposing his dear life unneedfully?
why tarry we here?"
""catesby," returned the duke, "here is the battle, not elsewhere.
the rest are but feigned onslaughts.
here must we vanquish.
and for the exposure -- if ye were an ugly hunchback, and the children gecked at you upon the street, ye would count your body cheaper, and an hour of glory worth a life.
howbeit, if ye will, let us ride on and visit the other posts.
sir richard here, my namesake, he shall still hold this entry, where he wadeth to the ankles in hot blood.
him can we trust.
but mark it, sir richard, ye are not yet done.
the worst is yet to ward.
sleep not."
he came right up to young shelton, looking him hard in the eyes, and taking his hand in both of his, gave it so extreme a squeeze that the blood had nearly spurted.
dick quailed before his eyes.
the insane excitement, the courage, and the cruelty that he read therein filled him with dismay about the future.
this young duke's was indeed a gallant spirit, to ride foremost in the ranks of war; but after the battle, in the days of peace and in the circle of his trusted friends, that mind, it was to be dreaded, would continue to bring forth the fruits of death.
chapter iii -- the battle of shoreby -lrb- concluded -rrb- dick, once more left to his own counsels, began to look about him.
the arrow-shot had somewhat slackened.
on all sides the enemy were falling back; and the greater part of the market-place was now left empty, the snow here trampled into orange mud, there splashed with gore, scattered all over with dead men and horses, and bristling thick with feathered arrows.
on his own side the loss had been cruel.
the jaws of the little street and the ruins of the barricade were heaped with the dead and dying; and out of the hundred men with whom he had begun the battle, there were not seventy left who could still stand to arms.
at the same time, the day was passing.
the first reinforcements might be looked for to arrive at any moment; and the lancastrians, already shaken by the result of their desperate but unsuccessful onslaught, were in an ill temper to support a fresh invader.
there was a dial in the wall of one of the two flanking houses; and this, in the frosty winter sunshine, indicated ten of the forenoon.
dick turned to the man who was at his elbow, a little insignificant archer, binding a cut in his arm.
""it was well fought," he said, "and, by my sooth, they will not charge us twice."
""sir," said the little archer, "ye have fought right well for york, and better for yourself.
never hath man in so brief space prevailed so greatly on the duke's affections.
that he should have entrusted such a post to one he knew not is a marvel.
but look to your head, sir richard!
if ye be vanquished -- ay, if ye give way one foot's breadth -- axe or cord shall punish it; and i am set if ye do aught doubtful, i will tell you honestly, here to stab you from behind."
dick looked at the little man in amaze.
""you!"
he cried.
""and from behind!"
""it is right so," returned the archer; "and because i like not the affair i tell it you.
ye must make the post good, sir richard, at your peril.
o, our crookback is a bold blade and a good warrior; but, whether in cold blood or in hot, he will have all things done exact to his commandment.
if any fail or hinder, they shall die the death."
""now, by the saints!"
cried richard, "is this so?
and will men follow such a leader?"
""nay, they follow him gleefully," replied the other; "for if he be exact to punish, he is most open-handed to reward.
and if he spare not the blood and sweat of others, he is ever liberal of his own, still in the first front of battle, still the last to sleep.
he will go far, will crookback dick o" gloucester!"
the young knight, if he had before been brave and vigilant, was now all the more inclined to watchfulness and courage.
his sudden favour, he began to perceive, had brought perils in its train.
and he turned from the archer, and once more scanned anxiously the market-place.
it lay empty as before.
""i like not this quietude," he said.
""doubtless they prepare us some surprise."
and, as if in answer to his remark, the archers began once more to advance against the barricade, and the arrows to fall thick.
but there was something hesitating in the attack.
they came not on roundly, but seemed rather to await a further signal.
dick looked uneasily about him, spying for a hidden danger.
and sure enough, about half way up the little street, a door was suddenly opened from within, and the house continued, for some seconds, and both by door and window, to disgorge a torrent of lancastrian archers.
these, as they leaped down, hurriedly stood to their ranks, bent their bows, and proceeded to pour upon dick's rear a flight of arrows.
at the same time, the assailants in the market-place redoubled their shot, and began to close in stoutly upon the barricade.
dick called down his whole command out of the houses, and facing them both ways, and encouraging their valour both by word and gesture, returned as best he could the double shower of shafts that fell about his post.
meanwhile house after house was opened in the street, and the lancastrians continued to pour out of the doors and leap down from the windows, shouting victory, until the number of enemies upon dick's rear was almost equal to the number in his face.
it was plain that he could hold the post no longer; what was worse, even if he could have held it, it had now become useless; and the whole yorkist army lay in a posture of helplessness upon the brink of a complete disaster.
the men behind him formed the vital flaw in the general defence; and it was upon these that dick turned, charging at the head of his men.
so vigorous was the attack, that the lancastrian archers gave ground and staggered, and, at last, breaking their ranks, began to crowd back into the houses from which they had so recently and so vaingloriously sallied.
meanwhile the men from the market-place had swarmed across the undefended barricade, and fell on hotly upon the other side; and dick must once again face about, and proceed to drive them back.
once again the spirit of his men prevailed; they cleared the street in a triumphant style, but even as they did so the others issued again out of the houses, and took them, a third time, upon the rear.
the yorkists began to be scattered; several times dick found himself alone among his foes and plying his bright sword for life; several times he was conscious of a hurt.
and meanwhile the fight swayed to and fro in the street without determinate result.
suddenly dick was aware of a great trumpeting about the outskirts of the town.
the war-cry of york began to be rolled up to heaven, as by many and triumphant voices.
and at the same time the men in front of him began to give ground rapidly, streaming out of the street and back upon the market-place.
some one gave the word to fly.
trumpets were blown distractedly, some for a rally, some to charge.
it was plain that a great blow had been struck, and the lancastrians were thrown, at least for the moment, into full disorder, and some degree of panic.
and then, like a theatre trick, there followed the last act of shoreby battle.
the men in front of richard turned tail, like a dog that has been whistled home, and fled like the wind.
at the same moment there came through the market-place a storm of horsemen, fleeing and pursuing, the lancastrians turning back to strike with the sword, the yorkists riding them down at the point of the lance.
conspicuous in the mellay, dick beheld the crookback.
he was already giving a foretaste of that furious valour and skill to cut his way across the ranks of war, which, years afterwards upon the field of bosworth, and when he was stained with crimes, almost sufficed to change the fortunes of the day and the destiny of the english throne.
evading, striking, riding down, he so forced and so manoeuvred his strong horse, so aptly defended himself, and so liberally scattered death to his opponents, that he was now far ahead of the foremost of his knights, hewing his way, with the truncheon of a bloody sword, to where lord risingham was rallying the bravest.
a moment more and they had met; the tall, splendid, and famous warrior against the deformed and sickly boy.
yet shelton had never a doubt of the result; and when the fight next opened for a moment, the figure of the earl had disappeared; but still, in the first of the danger, crookback dick was launching his big horse and plying the truncheon of his sword.
thus, by shelton's courage in holding the mouth of the street against the first attack, and by the opportune arrival of his seven hundred reinforcements, the lad, who was afterwards to be handed down to the execration of posterity under the name of richard iii., had won his first considerable fight.
chapter iv -- the sack of shoreby there was not a foe left within striking distance; and dick, as he looked ruefully about him on the remainder of his gallant force, began to count the cost of victory.
he was himself, now that the danger was ended, so stiff and sore, so bruised and cut and broken, and, above all, so utterly exhausted by his desperate and unremitting labours in the fight, that he seemed incapable of any fresh exertion.
but this was not yet the hour for repose.
shoreby had been taken by assault; and though an open town, and not in any manner to be charged with the resistance, it was plain that these rough fighters would be not less rough now that the fight was over, and that the more horrid part of war would fall to be enacted.
richard of gloucester was not the captain to protect the citizens from his infuriated soldiery; and even if he had the will, it might be questioned if he had the power.
it was, therefore, dick's business to find and to protect joanna; and with that end he looked about him at the faces of his men.
the three or four who seemed likeliest to be obedient and to keep sober he drew aside; and promising them a rich reward and a special recommendation to the duke, led them across the market-place, now empty of horsemen, and into the streets upon the further side.
every here and there small combats of from two to a dozen still raged upon the open street; here and there a house was being besieged, the defenders throwing out stools and tables on the heads of the assailants.
the snow was strewn with arms and corpses; but except for these partial combats the streets were deserted, and the houses, some standing open, and some shuttered and barricaded, had for the most part ceased to give out smoke.
dick, threading the skirts of these skirmishers, led his followers briskly in the direction of the abbey church; but when he came the length of the main street, a cry of horror broke from his lips.
sir daniel's great house had been carried by assault.
the gates hung in splinters from the hinges, and a double throng kept pouring in and out through the entrance, seeking and carrying booty.
meanwhile, in the upper storeys, some resistance was still being offered to the pillagers; for just as dick came within eyeshot of the building, a casement was burst open from within, and a poor wretch in murrey and blue, screaming and resisting, was forced through the embrasure and tossed into the street below.
the most sickening apprehension fell upon dick.
he ran forward like one possessed, forced his way into the house among the foremost, and mounted without pause to the chamber on the third floor where he had last parted from joanna.
it was a mere wreck; the furniture had been overthrown, the cupboards broken open, and in one place a trailing corner of the arras lay smouldering on the embers of the fire.
dick, almost without thinking, trod out the incipient conflagration, and then stood bewildered.
sir daniel, sir oliver, joanna, all were gone; but whether butchered in the rout or safe escaped from shoreby, who should say?
he caught a passing archer by the tabard.
""fellow," he asked, "were ye here when this house was taken?"
""let be," said the archer.
""a murrain!
let be, or i strike."
""hark ye," returned richard, "two can play at that.
stand and be plain."
but the man, flushed with drink and battle, struck dick upon the shoulder with one hand, while with the other he twitched away his garment.
thereupon the full wrath of the young leader burst from his control.
he seized the fellow in his strong embrace, and crushed him on the plates of his mailed bosom like a child; then, holding him at arm's length, he bid him speak as he valued life.
""i pray you mercy!"
gasped the archer.
""an i had thought ye were so angry i would "a" been charier of crossing you.
i was here indeed."
""know ye sir daniel?"
pursued dick.
""well do i know him," returned the man.
""was he in the mansion?"
""ay, sir, he was," answered the archer; "but even as we entered by the yard gate he rode forth by the garden."
""alone?"
cried dick.
""he may "a" had a score of lances with him," said the man.
""lances!
no women, then?"
asked shelton.
""troth, i saw not," said the archer.
""but there were none in the house, if that be your quest."
""i thank you," said dick.
""here is a piece for your pains."
but groping in his wallet, dick found nothing.
""inquire for me to-morrow," he added -- "richard shelt -- sir richard shelton," he corrected, "and i will see you handsomely rewarded."
and then an idea struck dick.
he hastily descended to the courtyard, ran with all his might across the garden, and came to the great door of the church.
it stood wide open; within, every corner of the pavement was crowded with fugitive burghers, surrounded by their families and laden with the most precious of their possessions, while, at the high altar, priests in full canonicals were imploring the mercy of god.
even as dick entered, the loud chorus began to thunder in the vaulted roofs.
he hurried through the groups of refugees, and came to the door of the stair that led into the steeple.
and here a tall churchman stepped before him and arrested his advance.
""whither, my son?"
he asked, severely.
""my father," answered dick, "i am here upon an errand of expedition.
stay me not.
i command here for my lord of gloucester."
""for my lord of gloucester?"
repeated the priest.
""hath, then, the battle gone so sore?"
""the battle, father, is at an end, lancaster clean sped, my lord of risingham -- heaven rest him!
-- left upon the field.
and now, with your good leave, i follow mine affairs."
and thrusting on one side the priest, who seemed stupefied at the news, dick pushed open the door and rattled up the stairs four at a bound, and without pause or stumble, till he stepped upon the open platform at the top.
shoreby church tower not only commanded the town, as in a map, but looked far, on both sides, over sea and land.
it was now near upon noon; the day exceeding bright, the snow dazzling.
and as dick looked around him, he could measure the consequences of the battle.
a confused, growling uproar reached him from the streets, and now and then, but very rarely, the clash of steel.
not a ship, not so much as a skiff remained in harbour; but the sea was dotted with sails and row-boats laden with fugitives.
on shore, too, the surface of the snowy meadows was broken up with bands of horsemen, some cutting their way towards the borders of the forest, others, who were doubtless of the yorkist side, stoutly interposing and beating them back upon the town.
over all the open ground there lay a prodigious quantity of fallen men and horses, clearly defined upon the snow.
to complete the picture, those of the foot soldiers as had not found place upon a ship still kept up an archery combat on the borders of the port, and from the cover of the shoreside taverns.
in that quarter, also, one or two houses had been fired, and the smoke towered high in the frosty sunlight, and blew off to sea in voluminous folds.
already close upon the margin of the woods, and somewhat in the line of holywood, one particular clump of fleeing horsemen riveted the attention of the young watcher on the tower.
it was fairly numerous; in no other quarter of the field did so many lancastrians still hold together; thus they had left a wide, discoloured wake upon the snow, and dick was able to trace them step by step from where they had left the town.
while dick stood watching them, they had gained, unopposed, the first fringe of the leafless forest, and, turning a little from their direction, the sun fell for a moment full on their array, as it was relieved against the dusky wood.
""murrey and blue!"
cried dick.
""i swear it -- murrey and blue!"
the next moment he was descending the stairway.
it was now his business to seek out the duke of gloucester, who alone, in the disorder of the forces, might be able to supply him with a sufficiency of men.
the fighting in the main town was now practically at an end; and as dick ran hither and thither, seeking the commander, the streets were thick with wandering soldiers, some laden with more booty than they could well stagger under, others shouting drunk.
none of them, when questioned, had the least notion of the duke's whereabouts; and, at last, it was by sheer good fortune that dick found him, where he sat in the saddle directing operations to dislodge the archers from the harbour side.
""sir richard shelton, ye are well found," he said.
""i owe you one thing that i value little, my life; and one that i can never pay you for, this victory.
catesby, if i had ten such captains as sir richard, i would march forthright on london.
but now, sir, claim your reward."
""freely, my lord," said dick, "freely and loudly.
one hath escaped to whom i owe some grudges, and taken with him one whom i owe love and service.
give me, then, fifty lances, that i may pursue; and for any obligation that your graciousness is pleased to allow, it shall be clean discharged."
""how call ye him?"
inquired the duke.
""sir daniel brackley," answered richard.
""out upon him, double-face!"
cried gloucester.
""here is no reward, sir richard; here is fresh service offered, and, if that ye bring his head to me, a fresh debt upon my conscience.
catesby, get him these lances; and you, sir, bethink ye, in the meanwhile, what pleasure, honour, or profit it shall be mine to give you."
just then the yorkist skirmishers carried one of the shoreside taverns, swarming in upon it on three sides, and driving out or taking its defenders.
crookback dick was pleased to cheer the exploit, and pushing his horse a little nearer, called to see the prisoners.
there were four or five of them -- two men of my lord shoreby's and one of lord risingham's among the number, and last, but in dick's eyes not least, a tall, shambling, grizzled old shipman, between drunk and sober, and with a dog whimpering and jumping at his heels.
the young duke passed them for a moment under a severe review.
""good," he said.
""hang them."
and he turned the other way to watch the progress of the fight.
""my lord," said dick, "so please you, i have found my reward.
grant me the life and liberty of yon old shipman."
gloucester turned and looked the speaker in the face.
""sir richard," he said, "i make not war with peacock's feathers, but steel shafts.
those that are mine enemies i slay, and that without excuse or favour.
for, bethink ye, in this realm of england, that is so torn in pieces, there is not a man of mine but hath a brother or a friend upon the other party.
if, then, i did begin to grant these pardons, i might sheathe my sword."
""it may be so, my lord; and yet i will be overbold, and at the risk of your disfavour, recall your lordship's promise," replied dick.
richard of gloucester flushed.
""mark it right well," he said, harshly.
""i love not mercy, nor yet mercymongers.
ye have this day laid the foundations of high fortune.
if ye oppose to me my word, which i have plighted, i will yield.
but, by the glory of heaven, there your favour dies!
""mine is the loss," said dick.
""give him his sailor," said the duke; and wheeling his horse, he turned his back upon young shelton.
dick was nor glad nor sorry.
he had seen too much of the young duke to set great store on his affection; and the origin and growth of his own favour had been too flimsy and too rapid to inspire much confidence.
one thing alone he feared -- that the vindictive leader might revoke the offer of the lances.
but here he did justice neither to gloucester's honour -lrb- such as it was -rrb- nor, above all, to his decision.
if he had once judged dick to be the right man to pursue sir daniel, he was not one to change; and he soon proved it by shouting after catesby to be speedy, for the paladin was waiting.
in the meanwhile, dick turned to the old shipman, who had seemed equally indifferent to his condemnation and to his subsequent release.
""arblaster," said dick, "i have done you ill; but now, by the rood, i think i have cleared the score."
but the old skipper only looked upon him dully and held his peace.
""come," continued dick, "a life is a life, old shrew, and it is more than ships or liquor.
say ye forgive me; for if your life be worth nothing to you, it hath cost me the beginnings of my fortune.
come, i have paid for it dearly; be not so churlish."
""an i had had my ship," said arblaster, "i would "a" been forth and safe on the high seas -- i and my man tom.
but ye took my ship, gossip, and i'm a beggar; and for my man tom, a knave fellow in russet shot him down.
"murrain!"
quoth he, and spake never again.
"murrain" was the last of his words, and the poor spirit of him passed."
a will never sail no more, will my tom.""
dick was seized with unavailing penitence and pity; he sought to take the skipper's hand, but arblaster avoided his touch.
""nay," said he, "let be.
y" have played the devil with me, and let that content you."
the words died in richard's throat.
he saw, through tears, the poor old man, bemused with liquor and sorrow, go shambling away, with bowed head, across the snow, and the unnoticed dog whimpering at his heels, and for the first time began to understand the desperate game that we play in life; and how a thing once done is not to be changed or remedied, by any penitence.
but there was no time left to him for vain regret.
catesby had now collected the horsemen, and riding up to dick he dismounted, and offered him his own horse.
""this morning," he said, "i was somewhat jealous of your favour; it hath not been of a long growth; and now, sir richard, it is with a very good heart that i offer you this horse -- to ride away with."
""suffer me yet a moment," replied dick.
""this favour of mine -- whereupon was it founded?"
""upon your name," answered catesby.
""it is my lord's chief superstition.
were my name richard, i should be an earl to-morrow."
""well, sir, i thank you," returned dick; "and since i am little likely to follow these great fortunes, i will even say farewell.
i will not pretend i was displeased to think myself upon the road to fortune; but i will not pretend, neither, that i am over-sorry to be done with it.
command and riches, they are brave things, to be sure; but a word in your ear -- yon duke of yours, he is a fearsome lad."
catesby laughed.
""nay," said he, "of a verity he that rides with crooked dick will ride deep.
well, god keep us all from evil!
speed ye well."
thereupon dick put himself at the head of his men, and giving the word of command, rode off.
he made straight across the town, following what he supposed to be the route of sir daniel, and spying around for any signs that might decide if he were right.
the streets were strewn with the dead and the wounded, whose fate, in the bitter frost, was far the more pitiable.
gangs of the victors went from house to house, pillaging and stabbing, and sometimes singing together as they went.
from different quarters, as he rode on, the sounds of violence and outrage came to young shelton's ears; now the blows of the sledge-hammer on some barricaded door, and now the miserable shrieks of women.
dick's heart had just been awakened.
he had just seen the cruel consequences of his own behaviour; and the thought of the sum of misery that was now acting in the whole of shoreby filled him with despair.
at length he reached the outskirts, and there, sure enough, he saw straight before him the same broad, beaten track across the snow that he had marked from the summit of the church.
here, then, he went the faster on; but still, as he rode, he kept a bright eye upon the fallen men and horses that lay beside the track.
many of these, he was relieved to see, wore sir daniel's colours, and the faces of some, who lay upon their back, he even recognised.
about half-way between the town and the forest, those whom he was following had plainly been assailed by archers; for the corpses lay pretty closely scattered, each pierced by an arrow.
and here dick spied among the rest the body of a very young lad, whose face was somehow hauntingly familiar to him.
he halted his troop, dismounted, and raised the lad's head.
as he did so, the hood fell back, and a profusion of long brown hair unrolled itself.
at the same time the eyes opened.
""ah!
lion driver!"
said a feeble voice.
""she is farther on.
ride -- ride fast!"
and then the poor young lady fainted once again.
one of dick's men carried a flask of some strong cordial, and with this dick succeeded in reviving consciousness.
then he took joanna's friend upon his saddlebow, and once more pushed toward the forest.
""why do ye take me?"
said the girl.
""ye but delay your speed."
""nay, mistress risingham," replied dick.
""shoreby is full of blood and drunkenness and riot.
here ye are safe; content ye."
""i will not be beholden to any of your faction," she cried; "set me down."
""madam, ye know not what ye say," returned dick.
""y" are hurt" -- "i am not," she said.
""it was my horse was slain."
""it matters not one jot," replied richard.
""ye are here in the midst of open snow, and compassed about with enemies.
whether ye will or not, i carry you with me.
glad am i to have the occasion; for thus shall i repay some portion of our debt."
for a little while she was silent.
then, very suddenly, she asked: "my uncle?"
""my lord risingham?"
returned dick.
""i would i had good news to give you, madam; but i have none.
i saw him once in the battle, and once only.
let us hope the best."
chapter v -- night in the woods: alicia risingham it was almost certain that sir daniel had made for the moat house; but, considering the heavy snow, the lateness of the hour, and the necessity under which he would lie of avoiding the few roads and striking across the wood, it was equally certain that he could not hope to reach it ere the morrow.
there were two courses open to dick; either to continue to follow in the knight's trail, and, if he were able, to fall upon him that very night in camp, or to strike out a path of his own, and seek to place himself between sir daniel and his destination.
either scheme was open to serious objection, and dick, who feared to expose joanna to the hazards of a fight, had not yet decided between them when he reached the borders of the wood.
at this point sir daniel had turned a little to his left, and then plunged straight under a grove of very lofty timber.
his party had then formed to a narrower front, in order to pass between the trees, and the track was trod proportionally deeper in the snow.
the eye followed it under the leafless tracery of the oaks, running direct and narrow; the trees stood over it, with knotty joints and the great, uplifted forest of their boughs; there was no sound, whether of man or beast -- not so much as the stirring of a robin; and over the field of snow the winter sun lay golden among netted shadows.
""how say ye," asked dick of one of the men, "to follow straight on, or strike across for tunstall?"
""sir richard," replied the man-at-arms, "i would follow the line until they scatter."
""ye are, doubtless, right," returned dick; "but we came right hastily upon the errand, even as the time commanded.
here are no houses, neither for food nor shelter, and by the morrow's dawn we shall know both cold fingers and an empty belly.
how say ye, lads?
will ye stand a pinch for expedition's sake, or shall we turn by holywood and sup with mother church?
the case being somewhat doubtful, i will drive no man; yet if ye would suffer me to lead you, ye would choose the first."
the men answered, almost with one voice, that they would follow sir richard where he would.
and dick, setting spur to his horse, began once more to go forward.
the snow in the trail had been trodden very hard, and the pursuers had thus a great advantage over the pursued.
they pushed on, indeed, at a round trot, two hundred hoofs beating alternately on the dull pavement of the snow, and the jingle of weapons and the snorting of horses raising a warlike noise along the arches of the silent wood.
presently, the wide slot of the pursued came out upon the high road from holywood; it was there, for a moment, indistinguishable; and, where it once more plunged into the unbeaten snow upon the farther side, dick was surprised to see it narrower and lighter trod.
plainly, profiting by the road, sir daniel had begun already to scatter his command.
at all hazards, one chance being equal to another, dick continued to pursue the straight trail; and that, after an hour's riding, in which it led into the very depths of the forest, suddenly split, like a bursting shell, into two dozen others, leading to every point of the compass.
dick drew bridle in despair.
the short winter's day was near an end; the sun, a dull red orange, shorn of rays, swam low among the leafless thickets; the shadows were a mile long upon the snow; the frost bit cruelly at the finger-nails; and the breath and steam of the horses mounted in a cloud.
""well, we are outwitted," dick confessed.
""strike we for holywood, after all.
it is still nearer us than tunstall -- or should be by the station of the sun."
so they wheeled to their left, turning their backs on the red shield of sun, and made across country for the abbey.
but now times were changed with them; they could no longer spank forth briskly on a path beaten firm by the passage of their foes, and for a goal to which that path itself conducted them.
now they must plough at a dull pace through the encumbering snow, continually pausing to decide their course, continually floundering in drifts.
the sun soon left them; the glow of the west decayed; and presently they were wandering in a shadow of blackness, under frosty stars.
presently, indeed, the moon would clear the hilltops, and they might resume their march.
but till then, every random step might carry them wider of their march.
there was nothing for it but to camp and wait.
sentries were posted; a spot of ground was cleared of snow, and, after some failures, a good fire blazed in the midst.
the men-at-arms sat close about this forest hearth, sharing such provisions as they had, and passing about the flask; and dick, having collected the most delicate of the rough and scanty fare, brought it to lord risingham's niece, where she sat apart from the soldiery against a tree.
she sat upon one horse-cloth, wrapped in another, and stared straight before her at the firelit scene.
at the offer of food she started, like one wakened from a dream, and then silently refused.
""madam," said dick, "let me beseech you, punish me not so cruelly.
wherein i have offended you, i know not; i have, indeed, carried you away, but with a friendly violence; i have, indeed, exposed you to the inclemency of night, but the hurry that lies upon me hath for its end the preservation of another, who is no less frail and no less unfriended than yourself.
at least, madam, punish not yourself; and eat, if not for hunger, then for strength."
""i will eat nothing at the hands that slew my kinsman," she replied.
""dear madam," dick cried, "i swear to you upon the rood i touched him not."
""swear to me that he still lives," she returned.
""i will not palter with you," answered dick.
""pity bids me to wound you.
in my heart i do believe him dead."
""and ye ask me to eat!"
she cried.
""ay, and they call you "sir!"
y" have won your spurs by my good kinsman's murder.
and had i not been fool and traitor both, and saved you in your enemy's house, ye should have died the death, and he -- he that was worth twelve of you -- were living."
""i did but my man's best, even as your kinsman did upon the other party," answered dick.
""were he still living -- as i vow to heaven i wish it!
-- he would praise, not blame me."
""sir daniel hath told me," she replied.
""he marked you at the barricade.
upon you, he saith, their party foundered; it was you that won the battle.
well, then, it was you that killed my good lord risingham, as sure as though ye had strangled him.
and ye would have me eat with you -- and your hands not washed from killing?
but sir daniel hath sworn your downfall.
he't is that will avenge me!"
the unfortunate dick was plunged in gloom.
old arblaster returned upon his mind, and he groaned aloud.
""do ye hold me so guilty?"
he said; "you that defended me -- you that are joanna's friend?"
""what made ye in the battle?"
she retorted.
""y" are of no party; y" are but a lad -- but legs and body, without government of wit or counsel!
wherefore did ye fight?
for the love of hurt, pardy!"
""nay," cried dick, "i know not.
but as the realm of england goes, if that a poor gentleman fight not upon the one side, perforce he must fight upon the other.
he may not stand alone;'t is not in nature."
""they that have no judgment should not draw the sword," replied the young lady.
""ye that fight but for a hazard, what are ye but a butcher?
war is but noble by the cause, and y" have disgraced it."
""madam," said the miserable dick, "i do partly see mine error.
i have made too much haste; i have been busy before my time.
already i stole a ship -- thinking, i do swear it, to do well -- and thereby brought about the death of many innocent, and the grief and ruin of a poor old man whose face this very day hath stabbed me like a dagger.
and for this morning, i did but design to do myself credit, and get fame to marry with, and, behold!
i have brought about the death of your dear kinsman that was good to me.
and what besides, i know not.
for, alas!
i may have set york upon the throne, and that may be the worser cause, and may do hurt to england.
o, madam, i do see my sin.
i am unfit for life.
i will, for penance sake and to avoid worse evil, once i have finished this adventure, get me to a cloister.
i will forswear joanna and the trade of arms.
i will be a friar, and pray for your good kinsman's spirit all my days."
it appeared to dick, in this extremity of his humiliation and repentance, that the young lady had laughed.
raising his countenance, he found her looking down upon him, in the fire-light, with a somewhat peculiar but not unkind expression.
""madam," he cried, thinking the laughter to have been an illusion of his hearing, but still, from her changed looks, hoping to have touched her heart, "madam, will not this content you?
i give up all to undo what i have done amiss; i make heaven certain for lord risingham.
and all this upon the very day that i have won my spurs, and thought myself the happiest young gentleman on ground."
""o boy," she said -- "good boy!"
and then, to the extreme surprise of dick, she first very tenderly wiped the tears away from his cheeks, and then, as if yielding to a sudden impulse, threw both her arms about his neck, drew up his face, and kissed him.
a pitiful bewilderment came over simple-minded dick.
""but come," she said, with great cheerfulness, "you that are a captain, ye must eat.
why sup ye not?"
""dear mistress risingham," replied dick, "i did but wait first upon my prisoner; but, to say truth, penitence will no longer suffer me to endure the sight of food.
i were better to fast, dear lady, and to pray."
""call me alicia," she said; "are we not old friends?
and now, come, i will eat with you, bit for bit and sup for sup; so if ye eat not, neither will i; but if ye eat hearty, i will dine like a ploughman."
so there and then she fell to; and dick, who had an excellent stomach, proceeded to bear her company, at first with great reluctance, but gradually, as he entered into the spirit, with more and more vigour and devotion: until, at last, he forgot even to watch his model, and most heartily repaired the expenses of his day of labour and excitement.
""lion-driver," she said, at length, "ye do not admire a maid in a man's jerkin?"
the moon was now up; and they were only waiting to repose the wearied horses.
by the moon's light, the still penitent but now well-fed richard beheld her looking somewhat coquettishly down upon him.
""madam" -- he stammered, surprised at this new turn in her manners.
""nay," she interrupted, "it skills not to deny; joanna hath told me, but come, sir lion-driver, look at me -- am i so homely -- come!"
and she made bright eyes at him.
""ye are something smallish, indeed" -- began dick.
and here again she interrupted him, this time with a ringing peal of laughter that completed his confusion and surprise.
""smallish!"
she cried.
""nay, now, be honest as ye are bold; i am a dwarf, or little better; but for all that -- come, tell me!
-- for all that, passably fair to look upon; is" t not so?"
""nay, madam, exceedingly fair," said the distressed knight, pitifully trying to seem easy.
""and a man would be right glad to wed me?"
she pursued.
""o, madam, right glad!"
agreed dick.
""call me alicia," said she.
""alicia," quoth sir richard.
""well, then, lion-driver," she continued, "sith that ye slew my kinsman, and left me without stay, ye owe me, in honour, every reparation; do ye not?"
""i do, madam," said dick.
""although, upon my heart, i do hold me but partially guilty of that brave knight's blood."
""would ye evade me?"
she cried.
""madam, not so.
i have told you; at your bidding, i will even turn me a monk," said richard.
""then, in honour, ye belong to me?"
she concluded.
""in honour, madam, i suppose" -- began the young man.
""go to!"
she interrupted; "ye are too full of catches.
in honour do ye belong to me, till ye have paid the evil?"
""in honour, i do," said dick.
""hear, then," she continued; "ye would make but a sad friar, methinks; and since i am to dispose of you at pleasure, i will even take you for my husband.
nay, now, no words!"
cried she.
""they will avail you nothing.
for see how just it is, that you who deprived me of one home, should supply me with another.
and as for joanna, she will be the first, believe me, to commend the change; for, after all, as we be dear friends, what matters it with which of us ye wed?
not one whit!"
""madam," said dick, "i will go into a cloister, an ye please to bid me; but to wed with anyone in this big world besides joanna sedley is what i will consent to neither for man's force nor yet for lady's pleasure.
pardon me if i speak my plain thoughts plainly; but where a maid is very bold, a poor man must even be the bolder."
""dick," she said, "ye sweet boy, ye must come and kiss me for that word.
nay, fear not, ye shall kiss me for joanna; and when we meet, i shall give it back to her, and say i stole it.
and as for what ye owe me, why, dear simpleton, methinks ye were not alone in that great battle; and even if york be on the throne, it was not you that set him there.
but for a good, sweet, honest heart, dick, y" are all that; and if i could find it in my soul to envy your joanna anything, i would even envy her your love."
chapter vi -- night in the woods -lrb- concluded -rrb-: dick and joan the horses had by this time finished the small store of provender, and fully breathed from their fatigues.
at dick's command, the fire was smothered in snow; and while his men got once more wearily to saddle, he himself, remembering, somewhat late, true woodland caution, chose a tall oak and nimbly clambered to the topmost fork.
hence he could look far abroad on the moonlit and snow-paven forest.
on the south-west, dark against the horizon, stood those upland, heathy quarters where he and joanna had met with the terrifying misadventure of the leper.
and there his eye was caught by a spot of ruddy brightness no bigger than a needle's eye.
he blamed himself sharply for his previous neglect.
were that, as it appeared to be, the shining of sir daniel's camp-fire, he should long ago have seen and marched for it; above all, he should, for no consideration, have announced his neighbourhood by lighting a fire of his own.
but now he must no longer squander valuable hours.
the direct way to the uplands was about two miles in length; but it was crossed by a very deep, precipitous dingle, impassable to mounted men; and for the sake of speed, it seemed to dick advisable to desert the horses and attempt the adventure on foot.
ten men were left to guard the horses; signals were agreed upon by which they could communicate in case of need; and dick set forth at the head of the remainder, alicia risingham walking stoutly by his side.
the men had freed themselves of heavy armour, and left behind their lances; and they now marched with a very good spirit in the frozen snow, and under the exhilarating lustre of the moon.
the descent into the dingle, where a stream strained sobbing through the snow and ice, was effected with silence and order; and on the further side, being then within a short half mile of where dick had seen the glimmer of the fire, the party halted to breathe before the attack.
in the vast silence of the wood, the lightest sounds were audible from far; and alicia, who was keen of hearing, held up her finger warningly and stooped to listen.
all followed her example; but besides the groans of the choked brook in the dingle close behind, and the barking of a fox at a distance of many miles among the forest, to dick's acutest hearkening, not a breath was audible.
""but yet, for sure, i heard the clash of harness," whispered alicia.
""madam," returned dick, who was more afraid of that young lady than of ten stout warriors, "i would not hint ye were mistaken; but it might well have come from either of the camps."
""it came not thence.
it came from westward," she declared.
""it may be what it will," returned dick; "and it must be as heaven please.
reck we not a jot, but push on the livelier, and put it to the touch.
up, friends -- enough breathed."
as they advanced, the snow became more and more trampled with hoof-marks, and it was plain that they were drawing near to the encampment of a considerable force of mounted men.
presently they could see the smoke pouring from among the trees, ruddily coloured on its lower edge and scattering bright sparks.
and here, pursuant to dick's orders, his men began to open out, creeping stealthily in the covert, to surround on every side the camp of their opponents.
he himself, placing alicia in the shelter of a bulky oak, stole straight forth in the direction of the fire.
at last, through an opening of the wood, his eye embraced the scene of the encampment.
the fire had been built upon a heathy hummock of the ground, surrounded on three sides by thicket, and it now burned very strong, roaring aloud and brandishing flames.
around it there sat not quite a dozen people, warmly cloaked; but though the neighbouring snow was trampled down as by a regiment, dick looked in vain for any horse.
he began to have a terrible misgiving that he was out-manoeuvred.
at the same time, in a tall man with a steel salet, who was spreading his hands before the blaze, he recognised his old friend and still kindly enemy, bennet hatch; and in two others, sitting a little back, he made out, even in their male disguise, joanna sedley and sir daniel's wife.
""well," thought he to himself, "even if i lose my horses, let me get my joanna, and why should i complain?"
and then, from the further side of the encampment, there came a little whistle, announcing that his men had joined, and the investment was complete.
bennet, at the sound, started to his feet; but ere he had time to spring upon his arms, dick hailed him.
""bennet," he said -- "bennet, old friend, yield ye.
ye will but spill men's lives in vain, if ye resist.""
't is master shelton, by st. barbary!"
cried hatch.
""yield me?
ye ask much.
what force have ye?"
""i tell you, bennet, ye are both outnumbered and begirt," said dick.
""caesar and charlemagne would cry for quarter.
i have two score men at my whistle, and with one shoot of arrows i could answer for you all."
""master dick," said bennet, "it goes against my heart; but i must do my duty.
the saints help you!"
and therewith he raised a little tucket to his mouth and wound a rousing call.
then followed a moment of confusion; for while dick, fearing for the ladies, still hesitated to give the word to shoot, hatch's little band sprang to their weapons and formed back to back as for a fierce resistance.
in the hurry of their change of place, joanna sprang from her seat and ran like an arrow to her lover's side.
""here, dick!"
she cried, as she clasped his hand in hers.
but dick still stood irresolute; he was yet young to the more deplorable necessities of war, and the thought of old lady brackley checked the command upon his tongue.
his own men became restive.
some of them cried on him by name; others, of their own accord, began to shoot; and at the first discharge poor bennet bit the dust.
then dick awoke.
""on!"
he cried.
""shoot, boys, and keep to cover.
england and york!"
but just then the dull beat of many horses on the snow suddenly arose in the hollow ear of the night, and, with incredible swiftness, drew nearer and swelled louder.
at the same time, answering tuckets repeated and repeated hatch's call.
""rally, rally!"
cried dick.
""rally upon me!
rally for your lives!"
but his men -- afoot, scattered, taken in the hour when they had counted on an easy triumph -- began instead to give ground severally, and either stood wavering or dispersed into the thickets.
and when the first of the horsemen came charging through the open avenues and fiercely riding their steeds into the underwood, a few stragglers were overthrown or speared among the brush, but the bulk of dick's command had simply melted at the rumour of their coming.
dick stood for a moment, bitterly recognising the fruits of his precipitate and unwise valour.
sir daniel had seen the fire; he had moved out with his main force, whether to attack his pursuers or to take them in the rear if they should venture the assault.
his had been throughout the part of a sagacious captain; dick's the conduct of an eager boy.
and here was the young knight, his sweetheart, indeed, holding him tightly by the hand, but otherwise alone, his whole command of men and horses dispersed in the night and the wide forest, like a paper of pins in a bay barn.
""the saints enlighten me!"
he thought.
""it is well i was knighted for this morning's matter; this doth me little honour."
and thereupon, still holding joanna, he began to run.
the silence of the night was now shattered by the shouts of the men of tunstall, as they galloped hither and thither, hunting fugitives; and dick broke boldly through the underwood and ran straight before him like a deer.
the silver clearness of the moon upon the open snow increased, by contrast, the obscurity of the thickets; and the extreme dispersion of the vanquished led the pursuers into wildly divergent paths.
hence, in but a little while, dick and joanna paused, in a close covert, and heard the sounds of the pursuit, scattering abroad, indeed, in all directions, but yet fainting already in the distance.
""an i had but kept a reserve of them together," dick cried, bitterly, "i could have turned the tables yet!
well, we live and learn; next time it shall go better, by the rood."
""nay, dick," said joanna, "what matters it?
here we are together once again."
he looked at her, and there she was -- john matcham, as of yore, in hose and doublet.
but now he knew her; now, even in that ungainly dress, she smiled upon him, bright with love; and his heart was transported with joy.
""sweetheart," he said, "if ye forgive this blunderer, what care i?
make we direct for holywood; there lieth your good guardian and my better friend, lord foxham.
there shall we be wed; and whether poor or wealthy, famous or unknown, what, matters it?
this day, dear love, i won my spurs; i was commended by great men for my valour; i thought myself the goodliest man of war in all broad england.
then, first, i fell out of my favour with the great; and now have i been well thrashed, and clean lost my soldiers.
there was a downfall for conceit!
but, dear, i care not -- dear, if ye still love me and will wed, i would have my knighthood done away, and mind it not a jot."
""my dick!"
she cried.
""and did they knight you?"
""ay, dear, ye are my lady now," he answered, fondly; "or ye shall, ere noon to-morrow -- will ye not?"
""that will i, dick, with a glad heart," she answered.
""ay, sir?
methought ye were to be a monk!"
said a voice in their ears.
""alicia!"
cried joanna.
""even so," replied the young lady, coming forward.
""alicia, whom ye left for dead, and whom your lion-driver found, and brought to life again, and, by my sooth, made love to, if ye want to know!"
""i'll not believe it," cried joanna.
""dick!"
""dick!"
mimicked alicia.
""dick, indeed!
ay, fair sir, and ye desert poor damsels in distress," she continued, turning to the young knight.
""ye leave them planted behind oaks.
but they say true -- the age of chivalry is dead."
""madam," cried dick, in despair, "upon my soul i had forgotten you outright.
madam, ye must try to pardon me.
ye see, i had new found joanna!"
""i did not suppose that ye had done it o" purpose," she retorted.
""but i will be cruelly avenged.
i will tell a secret to my lady shelton -- she that is to be," she added, curtseying.
""joanna," she continued, "i believe, upon my soul, your sweetheart is a bold fellow in a fight, but he is, let me tell you plainly, the softest-hearted simpleton in england.
go to -- ye may do your pleasure with him!
and now, fool children, first kiss me, either one of you, for luck and kindness; and then kiss each other just one minute by the glass, and not one second longer; and then let us all three set forth for holywood as fast as we can stir; for these woods, methinks, are full of peril and exceeding cold."
""but did my dick make love to you?"
asked joanna, clinging to her sweetheart's side.
""nay, fool girl," returned alicia; "it was i made love to him.
i offered to marry him, indeed; but he bade me go marry with my likes.
these were his words.
nay, that i will say: he is more plain than pleasant.
but now, children, for the sake of sense, set forward.
shall we go once more over the dingle, or push straight for holywood?"
""why," said dick, "i would like dearly to get upon a horse; for i have been sore mauled and beaten, one way and another, these last days, and my poor body is one bruise.
but how think ye?
if the men, upon the alarm of the fighting, had fled away, we should have gone about for nothing.
't is but some three short miles to holywood direct; the bell hath not beat nine; the snow is pretty firm to walk upon, the moon clear; how if we went even as we are?"
""agreed," cried alicia; but joanna only pressed upon dick's arm.
forth, then, they went, through open leafless groves and down snow-clad alleys, under the white face of the winter moon; dick and joanna walking hand in hand and in a heaven of pleasure; and their light-minded companion, her own bereavements heartily forgotten, followed a pace or two behind, now rallying them upon their silence, and now drawing happy pictures of their future and united lives.
still, indeed, in the distance of the wood, the riders of tunstall might be heard urging their pursuit; and from time to time cries or the clash of steel announced the shock of enemies.
but in these young folk, bred among the alarms of war, and fresh from such a multiplicity of dangers, neither fear nor pity could be lightly wakened.
content to find the sounds still drawing farther and farther away, they gave up their hearts to the enjoyment of the hour, walking already, as alicia put it, in a wedding procession; and neither the rude solitude of the forest, nor the cold of the freezing night, had any force to shadow or distract their happiness.
at length, from a rising hill, they looked below them on the dell of holywood.
the great windows of the forest abbey shone with torch and candle; its high pinnacles and spires arose very clear and silent, and the gold rood upon the topmost summit glittered brightly in the moon.
all about it, in the open glade, camp-fires were burning, and the ground was thick with huts; and across the midst of the picture the frozen river curved.
""by the mass," said richard, "there are lord foxham's fellows still encamped.
the messenger hath certainly miscarried.
well, then, so better.
we have power at hand to face sir daniel."
but if lord foxham's men still lay encamped in the long holm at holywood, it was from a different reason from the one supposed by dick.
they had marched, indeed, for shoreby; but ere they were half way thither, a second messenger met them, and bade them return to their morning's camp, to bar the road against lancastrian fugitives, and to be so much nearer to the main army of york.
for richard of gloucester, having finished the battle and stamped out his foes in that district, was already on the march to rejoin his brother; and not long after the return of my lord foxham's retainers, crookback himself drew rein before the abbey door.
it was in honour of this august visitor that the windows shone with lights; and at the hour of dick's arrival with his sweetheart and her friend, the whole ducal party was being entertained in the refectory with the splendour of that powerful and luxurious monastery.
dick, not quite with his good will, was brought before them.
gloucester, sick with fatigue, sat leaning upon one hand his white and terrifying countenance; lord foxham, half recovered from his wound, was in a place of honour on his left.
""how, sir?"
asked richard.
""have ye brought me sir daniel's head?"
""my lord duke," replied dick, stoutly enough, but with a qualm at heart, "i have not even the good fortune to return with my command.
i have been, so please your grace, well beaten."
gloucester looked upon him with a formidable frown.
""i gave you fifty lances, -lcb- 3 -rcb- sir," he said.
""my lord duke, i had but fifty men-at-arms," replied the young knight.
""how is this?"
said gloucester.
""he did ask me fifty lances."
""may it please your grace," replied catesby, smoothly, "for a pursuit we gave him but the horsemen."
""it is well," replied richard, adding, "shelton, ye may go."
""stay!"
said lord foxham.
""this young man likewise had a charge from me.
it may be he hath better sped.
say, master shelton, have ye found the maid?"
""i praise the saints, my lord," said dick, "she is in this house."
""is it even so?
well, then, my lord the duke," resumed lord foxham, "with your good will, to-morrow, before the army march, i do propose a marriage.
this young squire --" "young knight," interrupted catesby.
""say ye so, sir william?"
cried lord foxham.
""i did myself, and for good service, dub him knight," said gloucester.
""he hath twice manfully served me.
it is not valour of hands, it is a man's mind of iron, that he lacks.
he will not rise, lord foxham.
't is a fellow that will fight indeed bravely in a mellay, but hath a capon's heart.
howbeit, if he is to marry, marry him in the name of mary, and be done!"
""nay, he is a brave lad -- i know it," said lord foxham.
""content ye, then, sir richard.
i have compounded this affair with master hamley, and to-morrow ye shall wed." whereupon dick judged it prudent to withdraw; but he was not yet clear of the refectory, when a man, but newly alighted at the gate, came running four stairs at a bound, and, brushing through the abbey servants, threw himself on one knee before the duke.
""victory, my lord," he cried.
and before dick had got to the chamber set apart for him as lord foxham's guest, the troops in the holm were cheering around their fires; for upon that same day, not twenty miles away, a second crushing blow had been dealt to the power of lancaster.
chapter vii -- dick's revenge the next morning dick was afoot before the sun, and having dressed himself to the best advantage with the aid of the lord foxham's baggage, and got good reports of joan, he set forth on foot to walk away his impatience.
for some while he made rounds among the soldiery, who were getting to arms in the wintry twilight of the dawn and by the red glow of torches; but gradually he strolled further afield, and at length passed clean beyond the outposts, and walked alone in the frozen forest, waiting for the sun.
his thoughts were both quiet and happy.
his brief favour with the duke he could not find it in his heart to mourn; with joan to wife, and my lord foxham for a faithful patron, he looked most happily upon the future; and in the past he found but little to regret.
as he thus strolled and pondered, the solemn light of the morning grew more clear, the east was already coloured by the sun, and a little scathing wind blew up the frozen snow.
he turned to go home; but even as he turned, his eye lit upon a figure behind, a tree.
""stand!"
he cried.
""who goes?"
the figure stepped forth and waved its hand like a dumb person.
it was arrayed like a pilgrim, the hood lowered over the face, but dick, in an instant, recognised sir daniel.
he strode up to him, drawing his sword; and the knight, putting his hand in his bosom, as if to seize a hidden weapon, steadfastly awaited his approach.
""well, dickon," said sir daniel, "how is it to be?
do ye make war upon the fallen?"
""i made no war upon your life," replied the lad; "i was your true friend until ye sought for mine; but ye have sought for it greedily."
""nay -- self-defence," replied the knight.
""and now, boy, the news of this battle, and the presence of yon crooked devil here in mine own wood, have broken me beyond all help.
i go to holywood for sanctuary; thence overseas, with what i can carry, and to begin life again in burgundy or france."
""ye may not go to holywood," said dick.
""how!
may not?"
asked the knight.
""look ye, sir daniel, this is my marriage morn," said dick; "and yon sun that is to rise will make the brightest day that ever shone for me.
your life is forfeit -- doubly forfeit, for my father's death and your own practices to meward.
but i myself have done amiss; i have brought about men's deaths; and upon this glad day i will be neither judge nor hangman.
an ye were the devil, i would not lay a hand on you.
an ye were the devil, ye might go where ye will for me.
seek god's forgiveness; mine ye have freely.
but to go on to holywood is different.
i carry arms for york, and i will suffer no spy within their lines.
hold it, then, for certain, if ye set one foot before another, i will uplift my voice and call the nearest post to seize you."
""ye mock me," said sir daniel.
""i have no safety out of holywood."
""i care no more," returned richard.
""i let you go east, west, or south; north i will not.
holywood is shut against you.
go, and seek not to return.
for, once ye are gone, i will warn every post about this army, and there will be so shrewd a watch upon all pilgrims that, once again, were ye the very devil, ye would find it ruin to make the essay."
""ye doom me," said sir daniel, gloomily.
""i doom you not," returned richard.
""if it so please you to set your valour against mine, come on; and though i fear it be disloyal to my party, i will take the challenge openly and fully, fight you with mine own single strength, and call for none to help me.
so shall i avenge my father, with a perfect conscience."
""ay," said sir daniel, "y" have a long sword against my dagger."
""i rely upon heaven only," answered dick, casting his sword some way behind him on the snow.
""now, if your ill-fate bids you, come; and, under the pleasure of the almighty, i make myself bold to feed your bones to foxes."
""i did but try you, dickon," returned the knight, with an uneasy semblance of a laugh.
""i would not spill your blood."
""go, then, ere it be too late," replied shelton.
""in five minutes i will call the post.
i do perceive that i am too long-suffering.
had but our places been reversed, i should have been bound hand and foot some minutes past."
""well, dickon, i will go," replied sir daniel.
""when we next meet, it shall repent you that ye were so harsh."
and with these words, the knight turned and began to move off under the trees.
dick watched him with strangely-mingled feelings, as he went, swiftly and warily, and ever and again turning a wicked eye upon the lad who had spared him, and whom he still suspected.
there was upon one side of where he went a thicket, strongly matted with green ivy, and, even in its winter state, impervious to the eye.
herein, all of a sudden, a bow sounded like a note of music.
an arrow flew, and with a great, choked cry of agony and anger, the knight of tunstall threw up his hands and fell forward in the snow.
dick bounded to his side and raised him.
his face desperately worked; his whole body was shaken by contorting spasms.
""is the arrow black?"
he gasped.
""it is black," replied dick, gravely.
and then, before he could add one word, a desperate seizure of pain shook the wounded man from head to foot, so that his body leaped in dick's supporting arms, and with the extremity of that pang his spirit fled in silence.
the young man laid him back gently on the snow and prayed for that unprepared and guilty spirit, and as he prayed the sun came up at a bound, and the robins began chirping in the ivy.
when he rose to his feet, he found another man upon his knees but a few steps behind him, and, still with uncovered head, he waited until that prayer also should be over.
it took long; the man, with his head bowed and his face covered with his hands, prayed like one in a great disorder or distress of mind; and by the bow that lay beside him, dick judged that he was no other than the archer who had laid sir daniel low.
at length he, also, rose, and showed the countenance of ellis duckworth.
""richard," he said, very gravely, "i heard you.
ye took the better part and pardoned; i took the worse, and there lies the clay of mine enemy.
pray for me."
and he wrung him by the hand.
""sir," said richard, "i will pray for you, indeed; though how i may prevail i wot not.
but if ye have so long pursued revenge, and find it now of such a sorry flavour, bethink ye, were it not well to pardon others?
hatch -- he is dead, poor shrew!
i would have spared a better; and for sir daniel, here lies his body.
but for the priest, if i might anywise prevail, i would have you let him go."
a flash came into the eyes of ellis duckworth.
""nay," he said, "the devil is still strong within me.
but be at rest; the black arrow flieth nevermore -- the fellowship is broken.
they that still live shall come to their quiet and ripe end, in heaven's good time, for me; and for yourself, go where your better fortune calls you, and think no more of ellis."
chapter viii -- conclusion about nine in the morning, lord foxham was leading his ward, once more dressed as befitted her sex, and followed by alicia risingham, to the church of holywood, when richard crookback, his brow already heavy with cares, crossed their path and paused.
""is this the maid?"
he asked; and when lord foxham had replied in the affirmative, "minion," he added, "hold up your face until i see its favour."
he looked upon her sourly for a little.
""ye are fair," he said at last, "and, as they tell me, dowered.
how if i offered you a brave marriage, as became your face and parentage?"
""my lord duke," replied joanna, "may it please your grace, i had rather wed with sir richard."
""how so?"
he asked, harshly.
""marry but the man i name to you, and he shall be my lord, and you my lady, before night.
for sir richard, let me tell you plainly, he will die sir richard."
""i ask no more of heaven, my lord, than but to die sir richard's wife," returned joanna.
""look ye at that, my lord," said gloucester, turning to lord foxham.
""here be a pair for you.
the lad, when for good services i gave him his choice of my favour, chose but the grace of an old, drunken shipman.
i did warn him freely, but he was stout in his besottedness.
"here dieth your favour," said i; and he, my lord, with a most assured impertinence, "mine be the loss," quoth he.
it shall be so, by the rood!"
""said he so?"
cried alicia.
""then well said, lion-driver!"
""who is this?"
asked the duke.
""a prisoner of sir richard's," answered lord foxham; "mistress alicia risingham."
""see that she be married to a sure man," said the duke.
""i had thought of my kinsman, hamley, an it like your grace," returned lord foxham.
""he hath well served the cause."
""it likes me well," said richard.
""let them be wedded speedily.
say, fair maid, will you wed?"
""my lord duke," said alicia, "so as the man is straight" -- and there, in a perfect consternation, the voice died on her tongue.
""he is straight, my mistress," replied richard, calmly.
""i am the only crookback of my party; we are else passably well shapen.
ladies, and you, my lord," he added, with a sudden change to grave courtesy, "judge me not too churlish if i leave you.
a captain, in the time of war, hath not the ordering of his hours."
and with a very handsome salutation he passed on, followed by his officers.
""alack," cried alicia, "i am shent!"
""ye know him not," replied lord foxham.
""it is but a trifle; he hath already clean forgot your words."
""he is, then, the very flower of knighthood," said alicia.
""nay, he but mindeth other things," returned lord foxham.
""tarry we no more."
in the chancel they found dick waiting, attended by a few young men; and there were he and joan united.
when they came forth again, happy and yet serious, into the frosty air and sunlight, the long files of the army were already winding forward up the road; already the duke of gloucester's banner was unfolded and began to move from before the abbey in a clump of spears; and behind it, girt by steel-clad knights, the bold, black-hearted, and ambitious hunchback moved on towards his brief kingdom and his lasting infamy.
but the wedding party turned upon the other side, and sat down, with sober merriment, to breakfast.
the father cellarer attended on their wants, and sat with them at table.
hamley, all jealousy forgotten, began to ply the nowise loth alicia with courtship.
and there, amid the sounding of tuckets and the clash of armoured soldiery and horses continually moving forth, dick and joan sat side by side, tenderly held hands, and looked, with ever growing affection, in each other's eyes.
thenceforth the dust and blood of that unruly epoch passed them by.
they dwelt apart from alarms in the green forest where their love began.
two old men in the meanwhile enjoyed pensions in great prosperity and peace, and with perhaps a superfluity of ale and wine, in tunstall hamlet.
one had been all his life a shipman, and continued to the last to lament his man tom.
the other, who had been a bit of everything, turned in the end towards piety, and made a most religious death under the name of brother honestus in the neighbouring abbey.
so lawless had his will, and died a friar.
footnotes: -lcb- 1 -rcb- at the date of this story, richard crookback could not have been created duke of gloucester; but for clearness, with the reader's leave, he shall so be called.
-lcb- 2 -rcb- richard crookback would have been really far younger at this date.
_book_title_: robert_louis_stevenson___treasure_island.txt.out
part one -- the old buccaneer 1 the old sea-dog at the admiral benbow squire trelawney, dr. livesey, and the rest of these gentlemen having asked me to write down the whole particulars about treasure island, from the beginning to the end, keeping nothing back but the bearings of the island, and that only because there is still treasure not yet lifted, i take up my pen in the year of grace 17 __ and go back to the time when my father kept the admiral benbow inn and the brown old seaman with the sabre cut first took up his lodging under our roof.
i remember him as if it were yesterday, as he came plodding to the inn door, his sea-chest following behind him in a hand-barrow -- a tall, strong, heavy, nut-brown man, his tarry pigtail falling over the shoulder of his soiled blue coat, his hands ragged and scarred, with black, broken nails, and the sabre cut across one cheek, a dirty, livid white.
i remember him looking round the cover and whistling to himself as he did so, and then breaking out in that old sea-song that he sang so often afterwards: "fifteen men on the dead man's chest -- yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
in the high, old tottering voice that seemed to have been tuned and broken at the capstan bars.
then he rapped on the door with a bit of stick like a handspike that he carried, and when my father appeared, called roughly for a glass of rum.
this, when it was brought to him, he drank slowly, like a connoisseur, lingering on the taste and still looking about him at the cliffs and up at our signboard.
""this is a handy cove," says he at length; "and a pleasant sittyated grog-shop.
much company, mate?"
my father told him no, very little company, the more was the pity.
""well, then," said he, "this is the berth for me.
here you, matey," he cried to the man who trundled the barrow; "bring up alongside and help up my chest.
i'll stay here a bit," he continued.
""i'm a plain man; rum and bacon and eggs is what i want, and that head up there for to watch ships off.
what you mought call me?
you mought call me captain.
oh, i see what you're at -- there"; and he threw down three or four gold pieces on the threshold.
""you can tell me when i've worked through that," says he, looking as fierce as a commander.
and indeed bad as his clothes were and coarsely as he spoke, he had none of the appearance of a man who sailed before the mast, but seemed like a mate or skipper accustomed to be obeyed or to strike.
the man who came with the barrow told us the mail had set him down the morning before at the royal george, that he had inquired what inns there were along the coast, and hearing ours well spoken of, i suppose, and described as lonely, had chosen it from the others for his place of residence.
and that was all we could learn of our guest.
he was a very silent man by custom.
all day he hung round the cove or upon the cliffs with a brass telescope; all evening he sat in a corner of the parlour next the fire and drank rum and water very strong.
mostly he would not speak when spoken to, only look up sudden and fierce and blow through his nose like a fog-horn; and we and the people who came about our house soon learned to let him be.
every day when he came back from his stroll he would ask if any seafaring men had gone by along the road.
at first we thought it was the want of company of his own kind that made him ask this question, but at last we began to see he was desirous to avoid them.
when a seaman did put up at the admiral benbow -lrb- as now and then some did, making by the coast road for bristol -rrb- he would look in at him through the curtained door before he entered the parlour; and he was always sure to be as silent as a mouse when any such was present.
for me, at least, there was no secret about the matter, for i was, in a way, a sharer in his alarms.
he had taken me aside one day and promised me a silver fourpenny on the first of every month if i would only keep my "weather-eye open for a seafaring man with one leg" and let him know the moment he appeared.
often enough when the first of the month came round and i applied to him for my wage, he would only blow through his nose at me and stare me down, but before the week was out he was sure to think better of it, bring me my four-penny piece, and repeat his orders to look out for "the seafaring man with one leg."
how that personage haunted my dreams, i need scarcely tell you.
on stormy nights, when the wind shook the four corners of the house and the surf roared along the cove and up the cliffs, i would see him in a thousand forms, and with a thousand diabolical expressions.
now the leg would be cut off at the knee, now at the hip; now he was a monstrous kind of a creature who had never had but the one leg, and that in the middle of his body.
to see him leap and run and pursue me over hedge and ditch was the worst of nightmares.
and altogether i paid pretty dear for my monthly fourpenny piece, in the shape of these abominable fancies.
but though i was so terrified by the idea of the seafaring man with one leg, i was far less afraid of the captain himself than anybody else who knew him.
there were nights when he took a deal more rum and water than his head would carry; and then he would sometimes sit and sing his wicked, old, wild sea-songs, minding nobody; but sometimes he would call for glasses round and force all the trembling company to listen to his stories or bear a chorus to his singing.
often i have heard the house shaking with "yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum," all the neighbours joining in for dear life, with the fear of death upon them, and each singing louder than the other to avoid remark.
for in these fits he was the most overriding companion ever known; he would slap his hand on the table for silence all round; he would fly up in a passion of anger at a question, or sometimes because none was put, and so he judged the company was not following his story.
nor would he allow anyone to leave the inn till he had drunk himself sleepy and reeled off to bed.
his stories were what frightened people worst of all.
dreadful stories they were -- about hanging, and walking the plank, and storms at sea, and the dry tortugas, and wild deeds and places on the spanish main.
by his own account he must have lived his life among some of the wickedest men that god ever allowed upon the sea, and the language in which he told these stories shocked our plain country people almost as much as the crimes that he described.
my father was always saying the inn would be ruined, for people would soon cease coming there to be tyrannized over and put down, and sent shivering to their beds; but i really believe his presence did us good.
people were frightened at the time, but on looking back they rather liked it; it was a fine excitement in a quiet country life, and there was even a party of the younger men who pretended to admire him, calling him a "true sea-dog" and a "real old salt" and such like names, and saying there was the sort of man that made england terrible at sea.
in one way, indeed, he bade fair to ruin us, for he kept on staying week after week, and at last month after month, so that all the money had been long exhausted, and still my father never plucked up the heart to insist on having more.
if ever he mentioned it, the captain blew through his nose so loudly that you might say he roared, and stared my poor father out of the room.
i have seen him wringing his hands after such a rebuff, and i am sure the annoyance and the terror he lived in must have greatly hastened his early and unhappy death.
all the time he lived with us the captain made no change whatever in his dress but to buy some stockings from a hawker.
one of the cocks of his hat having fallen down, he let it hang from that day forth, though it was a great annoyance when it blew.
i remember the appearance of his coat, which he patched himself upstairs in his room, and which, before the end, was nothing but patches.
he never wrote or received a letter, and he never spoke with any but the neighbours, and with these, for the most part, only when drunk on rum.
the great sea-chest none of us had ever seen open.
he was only once crossed, and that was towards the end, when my poor father was far gone in a decline that took him off.
dr. livesey came late one afternoon to see the patient, took a bit of dinner from my mother, and went into the parlour to smoke a pipe until his horse should come down from the hamlet, for we had no stabling at the old benbow.
i followed him in, and i remember observing the contrast the neat, bright doctor, with his powder as white as snow and his bright, black eyes and pleasant manners, made with the coltish country folk, and above all, with that filthy, heavy, bleared scarecrow of a pirate of ours, sitting, far gone in rum, with his arms on the table.
suddenly he -- the captain, that is -- began to pipe up his eternal song: "fifteen men on the dead man's chest -- yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
drink and the devil had done for the rest -- yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
at first i had supposed "the dead man's chest" to be that identical big box of his upstairs in the front room, and the thought had been mingled in my nightmares with that of the one-legged seafaring man.
but by this time we had all long ceased to pay any particular notice to the song; it was new, that night, to nobody but dr. livesey, and on him i observed it did not produce an agreeable effect, for he looked up for a moment quite angrily before he went on with his talk to old taylor, the gardener, on a new cure for the rheumatics.
in the meantime, the captain gradually brightened up at his own music, and at last flapped his hand upon the table before him in a way we all knew to mean silence.
the voices stopped at once, all but dr. livesey's; he went on as before speaking clear and kind and drawing briskly at his pipe between every word or two.
the captain glared at him for a while, flapped his hand again, glared still harder, and at last broke out with a villainous, low oath, "silence, there, between decks!"
""were you addressing me, sir?"
says the doctor; and when the ruffian had told him, with another oath, that this was so, "i have only one thing to say to you, sir," replies the doctor, "that if you keep on drinking rum, the world will soon be quit of a very dirty scoundrel!"
the old fellow's fury was awful.
he sprang to his feet, drew and opened a sailor's clasp-knife, and balancing it open on the palm of his hand, threatened to pin the doctor to the wall.
the doctor never so much as moved.
he spoke to him as before, over his shoulder and in the same tone of voice, rather high, so that all the room might hear, but perfectly calm and steady: "if you do not put that knife this instant in your pocket, i promise, upon my honour, you shall hang at the next assizes."
then followed a battle of looks between them, but the captain soon knuckled under, put up his weapon, and resumed his seat, grumbling like a beaten dog.
""and now, sir," continued the doctor, "since i now know there's such a fellow in my district, you may count i'll have an eye upon you day and night.
i'm not a doctor only; i'm a magistrate; and if i catch a breath of complaint against you, if it's only for a piece of incivility like tonight's, i'll take effectual means to have you hunted down and routed out of this.
let that suffice."
soon after, dr. livesey's horse came to the door and he rode away, but the captain held his peace that evening, and for many evenings to come.
2 black dog appears and disappears it was not very long after this that there occurred the first of the mysterious events that rid us at last of the captain, though not, as you will see, of his affairs.
it was a bitter cold winter, with long, hard frosts and heavy gales; and it was plain from the first that my poor father was little likely to see the spring.
he sank daily, and my mother and i had all the inn upon our hands, and were kept busy enough without paying much regard to our unpleasant guest.
it was one january morning, very early -- a pinching, frosty morning -- the cove all grey with hoar-frost, the ripple lapping softly on the stones, the sun still low and only touching the hilltops and shining far to seaward.
the captain had risen earlier than usual and set out down the beach, his cutlass swinging under the broad skirts of the old blue coat, his brass telescope under his arm, his hat tilted back upon his head.
i remember his breath hanging like smoke in his wake as he strode off, and the last sound i heard of him as he turned the big rock was a loud snort of indignation, as though his mind was still running upon dr. livesey.
well, mother was upstairs with father and i was laying the breakfast-table against the captain's return when the parlour door opened and a man stepped in on whom i had never set my eyes before.
he was a pale, tallowy creature, wanting two fingers of the left hand, and though he wore a cutlass, he did not look much like a fighter.
i had always my eye open for seafaring men, with one leg or two, and i remember this one puzzled me.
he was not sailorly, and yet he had a smack of the sea about him too.
i asked him what was for his service, and he said he would take rum; but as i was going out of the room to fetch it, he sat down upon a table and motioned me to draw near.
i paused where i was, with my napkin in my hand.
""come here, sonny," says he.
""come nearer here."
i took a step nearer.
""is this here table for my mate bill?"
he asked with a kind of leer.
i told him i did not know his mate bill, and this was for a person who stayed in our house whom we called the captain.
""well," said he, "my mate bill would be called the captain, as like as not.
he has a cut on one cheek and a mighty pleasant way with him, particularly in drink, has my mate bill.
we'll put it, for argument like, that your captain has a cut on one cheek -- and we'll put it, if you like, that that cheek's the right one.
ah, well!
i told you.
now, is my mate bill in this here house?"
i told him he was out walking.
""which way, sonny?
which way is he gone?"
and when i had pointed out the rock and told him how the captain was likely to return, and how soon, and answered a few other questions, "ah," said he, "this'll be as good as drink to my mate bill."
the expression of his face as he said these words was not at all pleasant, and i had my own reasons for thinking that the stranger was mistaken, even supposing he meant what he said.
but it was no affair of mine, i thought; and besides, it was difficult to know what to do.
the stranger kept hanging about just inside the inn door, peering round the corner like a cat waiting for a mouse.
once i stepped out myself into the road, but he immediately called me back, and as i did not obey quick enough for his fancy, a most horrible change came over his tallowy face, and he ordered me in with an oath that made me jump.
as soon as i was back again he returned to his former manner, half fawning, half sneering, patted me on the shoulder, told me i was a good boy and he had taken quite a fancy to me.
""i have a son of my own," said he, "as like you as two blocks, and he's all the pride of my "art.
but the great thing for boys is discipline, sonny -- discipline.
now, if you had sailed along of bill, you would n't have stood there to be spoke to twice -- not you.
that was never bill's way, nor the way of sich as sailed with him.
and here, sure enough, is my mate bill, with a spy-glass under his arm, bless his old "art, to be sure.
you and me'll just go back into the parlour, sonny, and get behind the door, and we'll give bill a little surprise -- bless his "art, i say again."
so saying, the stranger backed along with me into the parlour and put me behind him in the corner so that we were both hidden by the open door.
i was very uneasy and alarmed, as you may fancy, and it rather added to my fears to observe that the stranger was certainly frightened himself.
he cleared the hilt of his cutlass and loosened the blade in the sheath; and all the time we were waiting there he kept swallowing as if he felt what we used to call a lump in the throat.
at last in strode the captain, slammed the door behind him, without looking to the right or left, and marched straight across the room to where his breakfast awaited him.
""bill," said the stranger in a voice that i thought he had tried to make bold and big.
the captain spun round on his heel and fronted us; all the brown had gone out of his face, and even his nose was blue; he had the look of a man who sees a ghost, or the evil one, or something worse, if anything can be; and upon my word, i felt sorry to see him all in a moment turn so old and sick.
""come, bill, you know me; you know an old shipmate, bill, surely," said the stranger.
the captain made a sort of gasp.
""black dog!"
said he.
""and who else?"
returned the other, getting more at his ease.
""black dog as ever was, come for to see his old shipmate billy, at the admiral benbow inn.
ah, bill, bill, we have seen a sight of times, us two, since i lost them two talons," holding up his mutilated hand.
""now, look here," said the captain; "you've run me down; here i am; well, then, speak up; what is it?"
""that's you, bill," returned black dog, "you're in the right of it, billy.
i'll have a glass of rum from this dear child here, as i've took such a liking to; and we'll sit down, if you please, and talk square, like old shipmates."
when i returned with the rum, they were already seated on either side of the captain's breakfast-table -- black dog next to the door and sitting sideways so as to have one eye on his old shipmate and one, as i thought, on his retreat.
he bade me go and leave the door wide open.
""none of your keyholes for me, sonny," he said; and i left them together and retired into the bar.
for a long time, though i certainly did my best to listen, i could hear nothing but a low gattling; but at last the voices began to grow higher, and i could pick up a word or two, mostly oaths, from the captain.
""no, no, no, no; and an end of it!"
he cried once.
and again, "if it comes to swinging, swing all, say i." then all of a sudden there was a tremendous explosion of oaths and other noises -- the chair and table went over in a lump, a clash of steel followed, and then a cry of pain, and the next instant i saw black dog in full flight, and the captain hotly pursuing, both with drawn cutlasses, and the former streaming blood from the left shoulder.
just at the door the captain aimed at the fugitive one last tremendous cut, which would certainly have split him to the chine had it not been intercepted by our big signboard of admiral benbow.
you may see the notch on the lower side of the frame to this day.
that blow was the last of the battle.
once out upon the road, black dog, in spite of his wound, showed a wonderful clean pair of heels and disappeared over the edge of the hill in half a minute.
the captain, for his part, stood staring at the signboard like a bewildered man.
then he passed his hand over his eyes several times and at last turned back into the house.
""jim," says he, "rum"; and as he spoke, he reeled a little, and caught himself with one hand against the wall.
""are you hurt?"
cried i. "rum," he repeated.
""i must get away from here.
rum!
rum!"
i ran to fetch it, but i was quite unsteadied by all that had fallen out, and i broke one glass and fouled the tap, and while i was still getting in my own way, i heard a loud fall in the parlour, and running in, beheld the captain lying full length upon the floor.
at the same instant my mother, alarmed by the cries and fighting, came running downstairs to help me.
between us we raised his head.
he was breathing very loud and hard, but his eyes were closed and his face a horrible colour.
""dear, deary me," cried my mother, "what a disgrace upon the house!
and your poor father sick!"
in the meantime, we had no idea what to do to help the captain, nor any other thought but that he had got his death-hurt in the scuffle with the stranger.
i got the rum, to be sure, and tried to put it down his throat, but his teeth were tightly shut and his jaws as strong as iron.
it was a happy relief for us when the door opened and doctor livesey came in, on his visit to my father.
""oh, doctor," we cried, "what shall we do?
where is he wounded?"
""wounded?
a fiddle-stick's end!"
said the doctor.
""no more wounded than you or i.
the man has had a stroke, as i warned him.
now, mrs. hawkins, just you run upstairs to your husband and tell him, if possible, nothing about it.
for my part, i must do my best to save this fellow's trebly worthless life; jim, you get me a basin."
when i got back with the basin, the doctor had already ripped up the captain's sleeve and exposed his great sinewy arm.
it was tattooed in several places.
""here's luck," "a fair wind," and "billy bones his fancy," were very neatly and clearly executed on the forearm; and up near the shoulder there was a sketch of a gallows and a man hanging from it -- done, as i thought, with great spirit.
""prophetic," said the doctor, touching this picture with his finger.
""and now, master billy bones, if that be your name, we'll have a look at the colour of your blood.
jim," he said, "are you afraid of blood?"
""no, sir," said i. "well, then," said he, "you hold the basin"; and with that he took his lancet and opened a vein.
a great deal of blood was taken before the captain opened his eyes and looked mistily about him.
first he recognized the doctor with an unmistakable frown; then his glance fell upon me, and he looked relieved.
but suddenly his colour changed, and he tried to raise himself, crying, "where's black dog?"
""there is no black dog here," said the doctor, "except what you have on your own back.
you have been drinking rum; you have had a stroke, precisely as i told you; and i have just, very much against my own will, dragged you headforemost out of the grave.
now, mr. bones --" "that's not my name," he interrupted.
""much i care," returned the doctor.
""it's the name of a buccaneer of my acquaintance; and i call you by it for the sake of shortness, and what i have to say to you is this; one glass of rum wo n't kill you, but if you take one you'll take another and another, and i stake my wig if you do n't break off short, you'll die -- do you understand that?
-- die, and go to your own place, like the man in the bible.
come, now, make an effort.
i'll help you to your bed for once."
between us, with much trouble, we managed to hoist him upstairs, and laid him on his bed, where his head fell back on the pillow as if he were almost fainting.
""now, mind you," said the doctor, "i clear my conscience -- the name of rum for you is death."
and with that he went off to see my father, taking me with him by the arm.
""this is nothing," he said as soon as he had closed the door.
""i have drawn blood enough to keep him quiet awhile; he should lie for a week where he is -- that is the best thing for him and you; but another stroke would settle him."
3 the black spot about noon i stopped at the captain's door with some cooling drinks and medicines.
he was lying very much as we had left him, only a little higher, and he seemed both weak and excited.
""jim," he said, "you're the only one here that's worth anything, and you know i've been always good to you.
never a month but i've given you a silver fourpenny for yourself.
and now you see, mate, i'm pretty low, and deserted by all; and jim, you'll bring me one noggin of rum, now, wo n't you, matey?"
""the doctor --" i began.
but he broke in cursing the doctor, in a feeble voice but heartily.
""doctors is all swabs," he said; "and that doctor there, why, what do he know about seafaring men?
i been in places hot as pitch, and mates dropping round with yellow jack, and the blessed land a-heaving like the sea with earthquakes -- what to the doctor know of lands like that?
-- and i lived on rum, i tell you.
it's been meat and drink, and man and wife, to me; and if i'm not to have my rum now i'm a poor old hulk on a lee shore, my blood'll be on you, jim, and that doctor swab"; and he ran on again for a while with curses.
""look, jim, how my fingers fidges," he continued in the pleading tone.
""i ca n't keep'em still, not i. i have n't had a drop this blessed day.
that doctor's a fool, i tell you.
if i do n't have a drain o" rum, jim, i'll have the horrors; i seen some on'em already.
i seen old flint in the corner there, behind you; as plain as print, i seen him; and if i get the horrors, i'm a man that has lived rough, and i'll raise cain.
your doctor hisself said one glass would n't hurt me.
i'll give you a golden guinea for a noggin, jim."
he was growing more and more excited, and this alarmed me for my father, who was very low that day and needed quiet; besides, i was reassured by the doctor's words, now quoted to me, and rather offended by the offer of a bribe.
""i want none of your money," said i, "but what you owe my father.
i'll get you one glass, and no more."
when i brought it to him, he seized it greedily and drank it out.
""aye, aye," said he, "that's some better, sure enough.
and now, matey, did that doctor say how long i was to lie here in this old berth?"
""a week at least," said i. "thunder!"
he cried.
""a week!
i ca n't do that; they'd have the black spot on me by then.
the lubbers is going about to get the wind of me this blessed moment; lubbers as could n't keep what they got, and want to nail what is another's.
is that seamanly behaviour, now, i want to know?
but i'm a saving soul.
i never wasted good money of mine, nor lost it neither; and i'll trick'em again.
i'm not afraid on'em.
i'll shake out another reef, matey, and daddle'em again."
as he was thus speaking, he had risen from bed with great difficulty, holding to my shoulder with a grip that almost made me cry out, and moving his legs like so much dead weight.
his words, spirited as they were in meaning, contrasted sadly with the weakness of the voice in which they were uttered.
he paused when he had got into a sitting position on the edge.
""that doctor's done me," he murmured.
""my ears is singing.
lay me back."
before i could do much to help him he had fallen back again to his former place, where he lay for a while silent.
""jim," he said at length, "you saw that seafaring man today?"
""black dog?"
i asked.
""ah!
black dog," says he.
""he's a bad un; but there's worse that put him on.
now, if i ca n't get away nohow, and they tip me the black spot, mind you, it's my old sea-chest they're after; you get on a horse -- you can, ca n't you?
well, then, you get on a horse, and go to -- well, yes, i will!
-- to that eternal doctor swab, and tell him to pipe all hands -- magistrates and sich -- and he'll lay'em aboard at the admiral benbow -- all old flint's crew, man and boy, all on'em that's left.
i was first mate, i was, old flint's first mate, and i'm the on" y one as knows the place.
he gave it me at savannah, when he lay a-dying, like as if i was to now, you see.
but you wo n't peach unless they get the black spot on me, or unless you see that black dog again or a seafaring man with one leg, jim -- him above all."
""but what is the black spot, captain?"
i asked.
""that's a summons, mate.
i'll tell you if they get that.
but you keep your weather-eye open, jim, and i'll share with you equals, upon my honour."
he wandered a little longer, his voice growing weaker; but soon after i had given him his medicine, which he took like a child, with the remark, "if ever a seaman wanted drugs, it's me," he fell at last into a heavy, swoon-like sleep, in which i left him.
what i should have done had all gone well i do not know.
probably i should have told the whole story to the doctor, for i was in mortal fear lest the captain should repent of his confessions and make an end of me.
but as things fell out, my poor father died quite suddenly that evening, which put all other matters on one side.
our natural distress, the visits of the neighbours, the arranging of the funeral, and all the work of the inn to be carried on in the meanwhile kept me so busy that i had scarcely time to think of the captain, far less to be afraid of him.
he got downstairs next morning, to be sure, and had his meals as usual, though he ate little and had more, i am afraid, than his usual supply of rum, for he helped himself out of the bar, scowling and blowing through his nose, and no one dared to cross him.
on the night before the funeral he was as drunk as ever; and it was shocking, in that house of mourning, to hear him singing away at his ugly old sea-song; but weak as he was, we were all in the fear of death for him, and the doctor was suddenly taken up with a case many miles away and was never near the house after my father's death.
i have said the captain was weak, and indeed he seemed rather to grow weaker than regain his strength.
he clambered up and down stairs, and went from the parlour to the bar and back again, and sometimes put his nose out of doors to smell the sea, holding on to the walls as he went for support and breathing hard and fast like a man on a steep mountain.
he never particularly addressed me, and it is my belief he had as good as forgotten his confidences; but his temper was more flighty, and allowing for his bodily weakness, more violent than ever.
he had an alarming way now when he was drunk of drawing his cutlass and laying it bare before him on the table.
but with all that, he minded people less and seemed shut up in his own thoughts and rather wandering.
once, for instance, to our extreme wonder, he piped up to a different air, a kind of country love-song that he must have learned in his youth before he had begun to follow the sea.
so things passed until, the day after the funeral, and about three o'clock of a bitter, foggy, frosty afternoon, i was standing at the door for a moment, full of sad thoughts about my father, when i saw someone drawing slowly near along the road.
he was plainly blind, for he tapped before him with a stick and wore a great green shade over his eyes and nose; and he was hunched, as if with age or weakness, and wore a huge old tattered sea-cloak with a hood that made him appear positively deformed.
i never saw in my life a more dreadful-looking figure.
he stopped a little from the inn, and raising his voice in an odd sing-song, addressed the air in front of him, "will any kind friend inform a poor blind man, who has lost the precious sight of his eyes in the gracious defence of his native country, england -- and god bless king george!
-- where or in what part of this country he may now be?"
""you are at the admiral benbow, black hill cove, my good man," said i. "i hear a voice," said he, "a young voice.
will you give me your hand, my kind young friend, and lead me in?"
i held out my hand, and the horrible, soft-spoken, eyeless creature gripped it in a moment like a vise.
i was so much startled that i struggled to withdraw, but the blind man pulled me close up to him with a single action of his arm.
""now, boy," he said, "take me in to the captain."
""sir," said i, "upon my word i dare not."
""oh," he sneered, "that's it!
take me in straight or i'll break your arm."
and he gave it, as he spoke, a wrench that made me cry out.
""sir," said i, "it is for yourself i mean.
the captain is not what he used to be.
he sits with a drawn cutlass.
another gentleman --" "come, now, march," interrupted he; and i never heard a voice so cruel, and cold, and ugly as that blind man's.
it cowed me more than the pain, and i began to obey him at once, walking straight in at the door and towards the parlour, where our sick old buccaneer was sitting, dazed with rum.
the blind man clung close to me, holding me in one iron fist and leaning almost more of his weight on me than i could carry.
""lead me straight up to him, and when i'm in view, cry out, "here's a friend for you, bill."
if you do n't, i'll do this," and with that he gave me a twitch that i thought would have made me faint.
between this and that, i was so utterly terrified of the blind beggar that i forgot my terror of the captain, and as i opened the parlour door, cried out the words he had ordered in a trembling voice.
the poor captain raised his eyes, and at one look the rum went out of him and left him staring sober.
the expression of his face was not so much of terror as of mortal sickness.
he made a movement to rise, but i do not believe he had enough force left in his body.
""now, bill, sit where you are," said the beggar.
""if i ca n't see, i can hear a finger stirring.
business is business.
hold out your left hand.
boy, take his left hand by the wrist and bring it near to my right."
we both obeyed him to the letter, and i saw him pass something from the hollow of the hand that held his stick into the palm of the captain's, which closed upon it instantly.
""and now that's done," said the blind man; and at the words he suddenly left hold of me, and with incredible accuracy and nimbleness, skipped out of the parlour and into the road, where, as i still stood motionless, i could hear his stick go tap-tap-tapping into the distance.
it was some time before either i or the captain seemed to gather our senses, but at length, and about at the same moment, i released his wrist, which i was still holding, and he drew in his hand and looked sharply into the palm.
""ten o'clock!"
he cried.
""six hours.
we'll do them yet," and he sprang to his feet.
even as he did so, he reeled, put his hand to his throat, stood swaying for a moment, and then, with a peculiar sound, fell from his whole height face foremost to the floor.
i ran to him at once, calling to my mother.
but haste was all in vain.
the captain had been struck dead by thundering apoplexy.
it is a curious thing to understand, for i had certainly never liked the man, though of late i had begun to pity him, but as soon as i saw that he was dead, i burst into a flood of tears.
it was the second death i had known, and the sorrow of the first was still fresh in my heart.
4 the sea-chest i lost no time, of course, in telling my mother all that i knew, and perhaps should have told her long before, and we saw ourselves at once in a difficult and dangerous position.
some of the man's money -- if he had any -- was certainly due to us, but it was not likely that our captain's shipmates, above all the two specimens seen by me, black dog and the blind beggar, would be inclined to give up their booty in payment of the dead man's debts.
the captain's order to mount at once and ride for doctor livesey would have left my mother alone and unprotected, which was not to be thought of.
indeed, it seemed impossible for either of us to remain much longer in the house; the fall of coals in the kitchen grate, the very ticking of the clock, filled us with alarms.
the neighbourhood, to our ears, seemed haunted by approaching footsteps; and what between the dead body of the captain on the parlour floor and the thought of that detestable blind beggar hovering near at hand and ready to return, there were moments when, as the saying goes, i jumped in my skin for terror.
something must speedily be resolved upon, and it occurred to us at last to go forth together and seek help in the neighbouring hamlet.
no sooner said than done.
bare-headed as we were, we ran out at once in the gathering evening and the frosty fog.
the hamlet lay not many hundred yards away, though out of view, on the other side of the next cove; and what greatly encouraged me, it was in an opposite direction from that whence the blind man had made his appearance and whither he had presumably returned.
we were not many minutes on the road, though we sometimes stopped to lay hold of each other and hearken.
but there was no unusual sound -- nothing but the low wash of the ripple and the croaking of the inmates of the wood.
it was already candle-light when we reached the hamlet, and i shall never forget how much i was cheered to see the yellow shine in doors and windows; but that, as it proved, was the best of the help we were likely to get in that quarter.
for -- you would have thought men would have been ashamed of themselves -- no soul would consent to return with us to the admiral benbow.
the more we told of our troubles, the more -- man, woman, and child -- they clung to the shelter of their houses.
the name of captain flint, though it was strange to me, was well enough known to some there and carried a great weight of terror.
some of the men who had been to field-work on the far side of the admiral benbow remembered, besides, to have seen several strangers on the road, and taking them to be smugglers, to have bolted away; and one at least had seen a little lugger in what we called kitt's hole.
for that matter, anyone who was a comrade of the captain's was enough to frighten them to death.
and the short and the long of the matter was, that while we could get several who were willing enough to ride to dr. livesey's, which lay in another direction, not one would help us to defend the inn.
they say cowardice is infectious; but then argument is, on the other hand, a great emboldener; and so when each had said his say, my mother made them a speech.
she would not, she declared, lose money that belonged to her fatherless boy; "if none of the rest of you dare," she said, "jim and i dare.
back we will go, the way we came, and small thanks to you big, hulking, chicken-hearted men.
we'll have that chest open, if we die for it.
and i'll thank you for that bag, mrs. crossley, to bring back our lawful money in."
of course i said i would go with my mother, and of course they all cried out at our foolhardiness, but even then not a man would go along with us.
all they would do was to give me a loaded pistol lest we were attacked, and to promise to have horses ready saddled in case we were pursued on our return, while one lad was to ride forward to the doctor's in search of armed assistance.
my heart was beating finely when we two set forth in the cold night upon this dangerous venture.
a full moon was beginning to rise and peered redly through the upper edges of the fog, and this increased our haste, for it was plain, before we came forth again, that all would be as bright as day, and our departure exposed to the eyes of any watchers.
we slipped along the hedges, noiseless and swift, nor did we see or hear anything to increase our terrors, till, to our relief, the door of the admiral benbow had closed behind us.
i slipped the bolt at once, and we stood and panted for a moment in the dark, alone in the house with the dead captain's body.
then my mother got a candle in the bar, and holding each other's hands, we advanced into the parlour.
he lay as we had left him, on his back, with his eyes open and one arm stretched out.
""draw down the blind, jim," whispered my mother; "they might come and watch outside.
and now," said she when i had done so, "we have to get the key off that; and who's to touch it, i should like to know!"
and she gave a kind of sob as she said the words.
i went down on my knees at once.
on the floor close to his hand there was a little round of paper, blackened on the one side.
i could not doubt that this was the black spot; and taking it up, i found written on the other side, in a very good, clear hand, this short message: "you have till ten tonight."
""he had till ten, mother," said i; and just as i said it, our old clock began striking.
this sudden noise startled us shockingly; but the news was good, for it was only six.
""now, jim," she said, "that key."
i felt in his pockets, one after another.
a few small coins, a thimble, and some thread and big needles, a piece of pigtail tobacco bitten away at the end, his gully with the crooked handle, a pocket compass, and a tinder box were all that they contained, and i began to despair.
""perhaps it's round his neck," suggested my mother.
overcoming a strong repugnance, i tore open his shirt at the neck, and there, sure enough, hanging to a bit of tarry string, which i cut with his own gully, we found the key.
at this triumph we were filled with hope and hurried upstairs without delay to the little room where he had slept so long and where his box had stood since the day of his arrival.
it was like any other seaman's chest on the outside, the initial "b" burned on the top of it with a hot iron, and the corners somewhat smashed and broken as by long, rough usage.
""give me the key," said my mother; and though the lock was very stiff, she had turned it and thrown back the lid in a twinkling.
a strong smell of tobacco and tar rose from the interior, but nothing was to be seen on the top except a suit of very good clothes, carefully brushed and folded.
they had never been worn, my mother said.
under that, the miscellany began -- a quadrant, a tin canikin, several sticks of tobacco, two brace of very handsome pistols, a piece of bar silver, an old spanish watch and some other trinkets of little value and mostly of foreign make, a pair of compasses mounted with brass, and five or six curious west indian shells.
i have often wondered since why he should have carried about these shells with him in his wandering, guilty, and hunted life.
in the meantime, we had found nothing of any value but the silver and the trinkets, and neither of these were in our way.
underneath there was an old boat-cloak, whitened with sea-salt on many a harbour-bar.
my mother pulled it up with impatience, and there lay before us, the last things in the chest, a bundle tied up in oilcloth, and looking like papers, and a canvas bag that gave forth, at a touch, the jingle of gold.
""i'll show these rogues that i'm an honest woman," said my mother.
""i'll have my dues, and not a farthing over.
hold mrs. crossley's bag."
and she began to count over the amount of the captain's score from the sailor's bag into the one that i was holding.
it was a long, difficult business, for the coins were of all countries and sizes -- doubloons, and louis d'ors, and guineas, and pieces of eight, and i know not what besides, all shaken together at random.
the guineas, too, were about the scarcest, and it was with these only that my mother knew how to make her count.
when we were about half-way through, i suddenly put my hand upon her arm, for i had heard in the silent frosty air a sound that brought my heart into my mouth -- the tap-tapping of the blind man's stick upon the frozen road.
it drew nearer and nearer, while we sat holding our breath.
then it struck sharp on the inn door, and then we could hear the handle being turned and the bolt rattling as the wretched being tried to enter; and then there was a long time of silence both within and without.
at last the tapping recommenced, and, to our indescribable joy and gratitude, died slowly away again until it ceased to be heard.
""mother," said i, "take the whole and let's be going," for i was sure the bolted door must have seemed suspicious and would bring the whole hornet's nest about our ears, though how thankful i was that i had bolted it, none could tell who had never met that terrible blind man.
but my mother, frightened as she was, would not consent to take a fraction more than was due to her and was obstinately unwilling to be content with less.
it was not yet seven, she said, by a long way; she knew her rights and she would have them; and she was still arguing with me when a little low whistle sounded a good way off upon the hill.
that was enough, and more than enough, for both of us.
""i'll take what i have," she said, jumping to her feet.
""and i'll take this to square the count," said i, picking up the oilskin packet.
next moment we were both groping downstairs, leaving the candle by the empty chest; and the next we had opened the door and were in full retreat.
we had not started a moment too soon.
the fog was rapidly dispersing; already the moon shone quite clear on the high ground on either side; and it was only in the exact bottom of the dell and round the tavern door that a thin veil still hung unbroken to conceal the first steps of our escape.
far less than half-way to the hamlet, very little beyond the bottom of the hill, we must come forth into the moonlight.
nor was this all, for the sound of several footsteps running came already to our ears, and as we looked back in their direction, a light tossing to and fro and still rapidly advancing showed that one of the newcomers carried a lantern.
""my dear," said my mother suddenly, "take the money and run on.
i am going to faint."
this was certainly the end for both of us, i thought.
how i cursed the cowardice of the neighbours; how i blamed my poor mother for her honesty and her greed, for her past foolhardiness and present weakness!
we were just at the little bridge, by good fortune; and i helped her, tottering as she was, to the edge of the bank, where, sure enough, she gave a sigh and fell on my shoulder.
i do not know how i found the strength to do it at all, and i am afraid it was roughly done, but i managed to drag her down the bank and a little way under the arch.
farther i could not move her, for the bridge was too low to let me do more than crawl below it.
so there we had to stay -- my mother almost entirely exposed and both of us within earshot of the inn.
5 the last of the blind man my curiosity, in a sense, was stronger than my fear, for i could not remain where i was, but crept back to the bank again, whence, sheltering my head behind a bush of broom, i might command the road before our door.
i was scarcely in position ere my enemies began to arrive, seven or eight of them, running hard, their feet beating out of time along the road and the man with the lantern some paces in front.
three men ran together, hand in hand; and i made out, even through the mist, that the middle man of this trio was the blind beggar.
the next moment his voice showed me that i was right.
""down with the door!"
he cried.
""aye, aye, sir!"
answered two or three; and a rush was made upon the admiral benbow, the lantern-bearer following; and then i could see them pause, and hear speeches passed in a lower key, as if they were surprised to find the door open.
but the pause was brief, for the blind man again issued his commands.
his voice sounded louder and higher, as if he were afire with eagerness and rage.
""in, in, in!"
he shouted, and cursed them for their delay.
four or five of them obeyed at once, two remaining on the road with the formidable beggar.
there was a pause, then a cry of surprise, and then a voice shouting from the house, "bill's dead."
but the blind man swore at them again for their delay.
""search him, some of you shirking lubbers, and the rest of you aloft and get the chest," he cried.
i could hear their feet rattling up our old stairs, so that the house must have shook with it.
promptly afterwards, fresh sounds of astonishment arose; the window of the captain's room was thrown open with a slam and a jingle of broken glass, and a man leaned out into the moonlight, head and shoulders, and addressed the blind beggar on the road below him.
""pew," he cried, "they've been before us.
someone's turned the chest out alow and aloft."
""is it there?"
roared pew.
""the money's there."
the blind man cursed the money.
""flint's fist, i mean," he cried.
""we do n't see it here nohow," returned the man.
""here, you below there, is it on bill?"
cried the blind man again.
at that another fellow, probably him who had remained below to search the captain's body, came to the door of the inn.
""bill's been overhauled a "ready," said he; "nothin" left."
""it's these people of the inn -- it's that boy.
i wish i had put his eyes out!"
cried the blind man, pew.
""there were no time ago -- they had the door bolted when i tried it.
scatter, lads, and find'em."
""sure enough, they left their glim here," said the fellow from the window.
""scatter and find'em!
rout the house out!"
reiterated pew, striking with his stick upon the road.
then there followed a great to-do through all our old inn, heavy feet pounding to and fro, furniture thrown over, doors kicked in, until the very rocks re-echoed and the men came out again, one after another, on the road and declared that we were nowhere to be found.
and just the same whistle that had alarmed my mother and myself over the dead captain's money was once more clearly audible through the night, but this time twice repeated.
i had thought it to be the blind man's trumpet, so to speak, summoning his crew to the assault, but i now found that it was a signal from the hillside towards the hamlet, and from its effect upon the buccaneers, a signal to warn them of approaching danger.
""there's dirk again," said one.
""twice!
we'll have to budge, mates."
""budge, you skulk!"
cried pew.
""dirk was a fool and a coward from the first -- you would n't mind him.
they must be close by; they ca n't be far; you have your hands on it.
scatter and look for them, dogs!
oh, shiver my soul," he cried, "if i had eyes!"
this appeal seemed to produce some effect, for two of the fellows began to look here and there among the lumber, but half-heartedly, i thought, and with half an eye to their own danger all the time, while the rest stood irresolute on the road.
""you have your hands on thousands, you fools, and you hang a leg!
you'd be as rich as kings if you could find it, and you know it's here, and you stand there skulking.
there was n't one of you dared face bill, and i did it -- a blind man!
and i'm to lose my chance for you!
i'm to be a poor, crawling beggar, sponging for rum, when i might be rolling in a coach!
if you had the pluck of a weevil in a biscuit you would catch them still."
""hang it, pew, we've got the doubloons!"
grumbled one.
""they might have hid the blessed thing," said another.
""take the georges, pew, and do n't stand here squalling."
squalling was the word for it; pew's anger rose so high at these objections till at last, his passion completely taking the upper hand, he struck at them right and left in his blindness and his stick sounded heavily on more than one.
these, in their turn, cursed back at the blind miscreant, threatened him in horrid terms, and tried in vain to catch the stick and wrest it from his grasp.
this quarrel was the saving of us, for while it was still raging, another sound came from the top of the hill on the side of the hamlet -- the tramp of horses galloping.
almost at the same time a pistol-shot, flash and report, came from the hedge side.
and that was plainly the last signal of danger, for the buccaneers turned at once and ran, separating in every direction, one seaward along the cove, one slant across the hill, and so on, so that in half a minute not a sign of them remained but pew.
him they had deserted, whether in sheer panic or out of revenge for his ill words and blows i know not; but there he remained behind, tapping up and down the road in a frenzy, and groping and calling for his comrades.
finally he took a wrong turn and ran a few steps past me, towards the hamlet, crying, "johnny, black dog, dirk," and other names, "you wo n't leave old pew, mates -- not old pew!"
just then the noise of horses topped the rise, and four or five riders came in sight in the moonlight and swept at full gallop down the slope.
at this pew saw his error, turned with a scream, and ran straight for the ditch, into which he rolled.
but he was on his feet again in a second and made another dash, now utterly bewildered, right under the nearest of the coming horses.
the rider tried to save him, but in vain.
down went pew with a cry that rang high into the night; and the four hoofs trampled and spurned him and passed by.
he fell on his side, then gently collapsed upon his face and moved no more.
i leaped to my feet and hailed the riders.
they were pulling up, at any rate, horrified at the accident; and i soon saw what they were.
one, tailing out behind the rest, was a lad that had gone from the hamlet to dr. livesey's; the rest were revenue officers, whom he had met by the way, and with whom he had had the intelligence to return at once.
some news of the lugger in kitt's hole had found its way to supervisor dance and set him forth that night in our direction, and to that circumstance my mother and i owed our preservation from death.
pew was dead, stone dead.
as for my mother, when we had carried her up to the hamlet, a little cold water and salts and that soon brought her back again, and she was none the worse for her terror, though she still continued to deplore the balance of the money.
in the meantime the supervisor rode on, as fast as he could, to kitt's hole; but his men had to dismount and grope down the dingle, leading, and sometimes supporting, their horses, and in continual fear of ambushes; so it was no great matter for surprise that when they got down to the hole the lugger was already under way, though still close in.
he hailed her.
a voice replied, telling him to keep out of the moonlight or he would get some lead in him, and at the same time a bullet whistled close by his arm.
soon after, the lugger doubled the point and disappeared.
mr. dance stood there, as he said, "like a fish out of water," and all he could do was to dispatch a man to b -- to warn the cutter.
""and that," said he, "is just about as good as nothing.
they've got off clean, and there's an end.
only," he added, "i'm glad i trod on master pew's corns," for by this time he had heard my story.
i went back with him to the admiral benbow, and you can not imagine a house in such a state of smash; the very clock had been thrown down by these fellows in their furious hunt after my mother and myself; and though nothing had actually been taken away except the captain's money-bag and a little silver from the till, i could see at once that we were ruined.
mr. dance could make nothing of the scene.
""they got the money, you say?
well, then, hawkins, what in fortune were they after?
more money, i suppose?"
""no, sir; not money, i think," replied i. "in fact, sir, i believe i have the thing in my breast pocket; and to tell you the truth, i should like to get it put in safety."
""to be sure, boy; quite right," said he.
""i'll take it, if you like."
""i thought perhaps dr. livesey --" i began.
""perfectly right," he interrupted very cheerily, "perfectly right -- a gentleman and a magistrate.
and, now i come to think of it, i might as well ride round there myself and report to him or squire.
master pew's dead, when all's done; not that i regret it, but he's dead, you see, and people will make it out against an officer of his majesty's revenue, if make it out they can.
now, i'll tell you, hawkins, if you like, i'll take you along."
i thanked him heartily for the offer, and we walked back to the hamlet where the horses were.
by the time i had told mother of my purpose they were all in the saddle.
""dogger," said mr. dance, "you have a good horse; take up this lad behind you."
as soon as i was mounted, holding on to dogger's belt, the supervisor gave the word, and the party struck out at a bouncing trot on the road to dr. livesey's house.
6 the captain's papers we rode hard all the way till we drew up before dr. livesey's door.
the house was all dark to the front.
mr. dance told me to jump down and knock, and dogger gave me a stirrup to descend by.
the door was opened almost at once by the maid.
""is dr. livesey in?"
i asked.
no, she said, he had come home in the afternoon but had gone up to the hall to dine and pass the evening with the squire.
""so there we go, boys," said mr. dance.
this time, as the distance was short, i did not mount, but ran with dogger's stirrup-leather to the lodge gates and up the long, leafless, moonlit avenue to where the white line of the hall buildings looked on either hand on great old gardens.
here mr. dance dismounted, and taking me along with him, was admitted at a word into the house.
the servant led us down a matted passage and showed us at the end into a great library, all lined with bookcases and busts upon the top of them, where the squire and dr. livesey sat, pipe in hand, on either side of a bright fire.
i had never seen the squire so near at hand.
he was a tall man, over six feet high, and broad in proportion, and he had a bluff, rough-and-ready face, all roughened and reddened and lined in his long travels.
his eyebrows were very black, and moved readily, and this gave him a look of some temper, not bad, you would say, but quick and high.
""come in, mr. dance," says he, very stately and condescending.
""good evening, dance," says the doctor with a nod.
""and good evening to you, friend jim.
what good wind brings you here?"
the supervisor stood up straight and stiff and told his story like a lesson; and you should have seen how the two gentlemen leaned forward and looked at each other, and forgot to smoke in their surprise and interest.
when they heard how my mother went back to the inn, dr. livesey fairly slapped his thigh, and the squire cried "bravo!"
and broke his long pipe against the grate.
long before it was done, mr. trelawney -lrb- that, you will remember, was the squire's name -rrb- had got up from his seat and was striding about the room, and the doctor, as if to hear the better, had taken off his powdered wig and sat there looking very strange indeed with his own close-cropped black poll.
at last mr. dance finished the story.
""mr. dance," said the squire, "you are a very noble fellow.
and as for riding down that black, atrocious miscreant, i regard it as an act of virtue, sir, like stamping on a cockroach.
this lad hawkins is a trump, i perceive.
hawkins, will you ring that bell?
mr. dance must have some ale."
""and so, jim," said the doctor, "you have the thing that they were after, have you?"
""here it is, sir," said i, and gave him the oilskin packet.
the doctor looked it all over, as if his fingers were itching to open it; but instead of doing that, he put it quietly in the pocket of his coat.
""squire," said he, "when dance has had his ale he must, of course, be off on his majesty's service; but i mean to keep jim hawkins here to sleep at my house, and with your permission, i propose we should have up the cold pie and let him sup."
""as you will, livesey," said the squire; "hawkins has earned better than cold pie."
so a big pigeon pie was brought in and put on a sidetable, and i made a hearty supper, for i was as hungry as a hawk, while mr. dance was further complimented and at last dismissed.
""and now, squire," said the doctor.
""and now, livesey," said the squire in the same breath.
""one at a time, one at a time," laughed dr. livesey.
""you have heard of this flint, i suppose?"
""heard of him!"
cried the squire.
""heard of him, you say!
he was the bloodthirstiest buccaneer that sailed.
blackbeard was a child to flint.
the spaniards were so prodigiously afraid of him that, i tell you, sir, i was sometimes proud he was an englishman.
i've seen his top-sails with these eyes, off trinidad, and the cowardly son of a rum-puncheon that i sailed with put back -- put back, sir, into port of spain."
""well, i've heard of him myself, in england," said the doctor.
""but the point is, had he money?"
""money!"
cried the squire.
""have you heard the story?
what were these villains after but money?
what do they care for but money?
for what would they risk their rascal carcasses but money?"
""that we shall soon know," replied the doctor.
""but you are so confoundedly hot-headed and exclamatory that i can not get a word in.
what i want to know is this: supposing that i have here in my pocket some clue to where flint buried his treasure, will that treasure amount to much?"
""amount, sir!"
cried the squire.
""it will amount to this: if we have the clue you talk about, i fit out a ship in bristol dock, and take you and hawkins here along, and i'll have that treasure if i search a year."
""very well," said the doctor.
""now, then, if jim is agreeable, we'll open the packet"; and he laid it before him on the table.
the bundle was sewn together, and the doctor had to get out his instrument case and cut the stitches with his medical scissors.
it contained two things -- a book and a sealed paper.
""first of all we'll try the book," observed the doctor.
the squire and i were both peering over his shoulder as he opened it, for dr. livesey had kindly motioned me to come round from the side-table, where i had been eating, to enjoy the sport of the search.
on the first page there were only some scraps of writing, such as a man with a pen in his hand might make for idleness or practice.
one was the same as the tattoo mark, "billy bones his fancy"; then there was "mr. w. bones, mate," "no more rum," "off palm key he got itt," and some other snatches, mostly single words and unintelligible.
i could not help wondering who it was that had "got itt," and what "itt" was that he got.
a knife in his back as like as not.
""not much instruction there," said dr. livesey as he passed on.
the next ten or twelve pages were filled with a curious series of entries.
there was a date at one end of the line and at the other a sum of money, as in common account-books, but instead of explanatory writing, only a varying number of crosses between the two.
on the 12th of june, 1745, for instance, a sum of seventy pounds had plainly become due to someone, and there was nothing but six crosses to explain the cause.
in a few cases, to be sure, the name of a place would be added, as "offe caraccas," or a mere entry of latitude and longitude, as "62o 17" 20", 19o 2" 40"."
the record lasted over nearly twenty years, the amount of the separate entries growing larger as time went on, and at the end a grand total had been made out after five or six wrong additions, and these words appended, "bones, his pile."
""i ca n't make head or tail of this," said dr. livesey.
""the thing is as clear as noonday," cried the squire.
""this is the black-hearted hound's account-book.
these crosses stand for the names of ships or towns that they sank or plundered.
the sums are the scoundrel's share, and where he feared an ambiguity, you see he added something clearer.
"offe caraccas," now; you see, here was some unhappy vessel boarded off that coast.
god help the poor souls that manned her -- coral long ago."
""right!"
said the doctor.
""see what it is to be a traveller.
right!
and the amounts increase, you see, as he rose in rank."
there was little else in the volume but a few bearings of places noted in the blank leaves towards the end and a table for reducing french, english, and spanish moneys to a common value.
""thrifty man!"
cried the doctor.
""he was n't the one to be cheated."
""and now," said the squire, "for the other."
the paper had been sealed in several places with a thimble by way of seal; the very thimble, perhaps, that i had found in the captain's pocket.
the doctor opened the seals with great care, and there fell out the map of an island, with latitude and longitude, soundings, names of hills and bays and inlets, and every particular that would be needed to bring a ship to a safe anchorage upon its shores.
it was about nine miles long and five across, shaped, you might say, like a fat dragon standing up, and had two fine land-locked harbours, and a hill in the centre part marked "the spy-glass."
there were several additions of a later date, but above all, three crosses of red ink -- two on the north part of the island, one in the southwest -- and beside this last, in the same red ink, and in a small, neat hand, very different from the captain's tottery characters, these words: "bulk of treasure here."
over on the back the same hand had written this further information: tall tree, spy-glass shoulder, bearing a point to the n. of n.n.e. skeleton island e.s.e. and by e. ten feet.
the bar silver is in the north cache; you can find it by the trend of the east hummock, ten fathoms south of the black crag with the face on it.
the arms are easy found, in the sand-hill, n. point of north inlet cape, bearing e. and a quarter n. j.f..
that was all; but brief as it was, and to me incomprehensible, it filled the squire and dr. livesey with delight.
""livesey," said the squire, "you will give up this wretched practice at once.
tomorrow i start for bristol.
in three weeks" time -- three weeks!
-- two weeks -- ten days -- we'll have the best ship, sir, and the choicest crew in england.
hawkins shall come as cabin-boy.
you'll make a famous cabin-boy, hawkins.
you, livesey, are ship's doctor; i am admiral.
we'll take redruth, joyce, and hunter.
we'll have favourable winds, a quick passage, and not the least difficulty in finding the spot, and money to eat, to roll in, to play duck and drake with ever after."
""trelawney," said the doctor, "i'll go with you; and i'll go bail for it, so will jim, and be a credit to the undertaking.
there's only one man i'm afraid of."
""and who's that?"
cried the squire.
""name the dog, sir!"
""you," replied the doctor; "for you can not hold your tongue.
we are not the only men who know of this paper.
these fellows who attacked the inn tonight -- bold, desperate blades, for sure -- and the rest who stayed aboard that lugger, and more, i dare say, not far off, are, one and all, through thick and thin, bound that they'll get that money.
we must none of us go alone till we get to sea.
jim and i shall stick together in the meanwhile; you'll take joyce and hunter when you ride to bristol, and from first to last, not one of us must breathe a word of what we've found."
""livesey," returned the squire, "you are always in the right of it.
i'll be as silent as the grave."
part two -- the sea-cook 7 i go to bristol it was longer than the squire imagined ere we were ready for the sea, and none of our first plans -- not even dr. livesey's, of keeping me beside him -- could be carried out as we intended.
the doctor had to go to london for a physician to take charge of his practice; the squire was hard at work at bristol; and i lived on at the hall under the charge of old redruth, the gamekeeper, almost a prisoner, but full of sea-dreams and the most charming anticipations of strange islands and adventures.
i brooded by the hour together over the map, all the details of which i well remembered.
sitting by the fire in the housekeeper's room, i approached that island in my fancy from every possible direction; i explored every acre of its surface; i climbed a thousand times to that tall hill they call the spy-glass, and from the top enjoyed the most wonderful and changing prospects.
sometimes the isle was thick with savages, with whom we fought, sometimes full of dangerous animals that hunted us, but in all my fancies nothing occurred to me so strange and tragic as our actual adventures.
so the weeks passed on, till one fine day there came a letter addressed to dr. livesey, with this addition, "to be opened, in the case of his absence, by tom redruth or young hawkins."
obeying this order, we found, or rather i found -- for the gamekeeper was a poor hand at reading anything but print -- the following important news: old anchor inn, bristol, march 1, 17 -- dear livesey -- as i do not know whether you are at the hall or still in london, i send this in double to both places.
the ship is bought and fitted.
she lies at anchor, ready for sea.
you never imagined a sweeter schooner -- a child might sail her -- two hundred tons; name, hispaniola.
i got her through my old friend, blandly, who has proved himself throughout the most surprising trump.
the admirable fellow literally slaved in my interest, and so, i may say, did everyone in bristol, as soon as they got wind of the port we sailed for -- treasure, i mean.
""redruth," said i, interrupting the letter, "dr. livesey will not like that.
the squire has been talking, after all."
""well, who's a better right?"
growled the gamekeeper.
""a pretty rum go if squire ai n't to talk for dr. livesey, i should think."
at that i gave up all attempts at commentary and read straight on: blandly himself found the hispaniola, and by the most admirable management got her for the merest trifle.
there is a class of men in bristol monstrously prejudiced against blandly.
they go the length of declaring that this honest creature would do anything for money, that the hispaniola belonged to him, and that he sold it me absurdly high -- the most transparent calumnies.
none of them dare, however, to deny the merits of the ship.
so far there was not a hitch.
the workpeople, to be sure -- riggers and what not -- were most annoyingly slow; but time cured that.
it was the crew that troubled me.
i wished a round score of men -- in case of natives, buccaneers, or the odious french -- and i had the worry of the deuce itself to find so much as half a dozen, till the most remarkable stroke of fortune brought me the very man that i required.
i was standing on the dock, when, by the merest accident, i fell in talk with him.
i found he was an old sailor, kept a public-house, knew all the seafaring men in bristol, had lost his health ashore, and wanted a good berth as cook to get to sea again.
he had hobbled down there that morning, he said, to get a smell of the salt.
i was monstrously touched -- so would you have been -- and, out of pure pity, i engaged him on the spot to be ship's cook.
long john silver, he is called, and has lost a leg; but that i regarded as a recommendation, since he lost it in his country's service, under the immortal hawke.
he has no pension, livesey.
imagine the abominable age we live in!
well, sir, i thought i had only found a cook, but it was a crew i had discovered.
between silver and myself we got together in a few days a company of the toughest old salts imaginable -- not pretty to look at, but fellows, by their faces, of the most indomitable spirit.
i declare we could fight a frigate.
long john even got rid of two out of the six or seven i had already engaged.
he showed me in a moment that they were just the sort of fresh-water swabs we had to fear in an adventure of importance.
i am in the most magnificent health and spirits, eating like a bull, sleeping like a tree, yet i shall not enjoy a moment till i hear my old tarpaulins tramping round the capstan.
seaward, ho!
hang the treasure!
it's the glory of the sea that has turned my head.
so now, livesey, come post; do not lose an hour, if you respect me.
let young hawkins go at once to see his mother, with redruth for a guard; and then both come full speed to bristol.
john trelawney postscript -- i did not tell you that blandly, who, by the way, is to send a consort after us if we do n't turn up by the end of august, had found an admirable fellow for sailing master -- a stiff man, which i regret, but in all other respects a treasure.
long john silver unearthed a very competent man for a mate, a man named arrow.
i have a boatswain who pipes, livesey; so things shall go man-o" - war fashion on board the good ship hispaniola.
i forgot to tell you that silver is a man of substance; i know of my own knowledge that he has a banker's account, which has never been overdrawn.
he leaves his wife to manage the inn; and as she is a woman of colour, a pair of old bachelors like you and i may be excused for guessing that it is the wife, quite as much as the health, that sends him back to roving.
j. t. p.p.s. -- hawkins may stay one night with his mother.
j. t.
you can fancy the excitement into which that letter put me.
i was half beside myself with glee; and if ever i despised a man, it was old tom redruth, who could do nothing but grumble and lament.
any of the under-gamekeepers would gladly have changed places with him; but such was not the squire's pleasure, and the squire's pleasure was like law among them all.
nobody but old redruth would have dared so much as even to grumble.
the next morning he and i set out on foot for the admiral benbow, and there i found my mother in good health and spirits.
the captain, who had so long been a cause of so much discomfort, was gone where the wicked cease from troubling.
the squire had had everything repaired, and the public rooms and the sign repainted, and had added some furniture -- above all a beautiful armchair for mother in the bar.
he had found her a boy as an apprentice also so that she should not want help while i was gone.
it was on seeing that boy that i understood, for the first time, my situation.
i had thought up to that moment of the adventures before me, not at all of the home that i was leaving; and now, at sight of this clumsy stranger, who was to stay here in my place beside my mother, i had my first attack of tears.
i am afraid i led that boy a dog's life, for as he was new to the work, i had a hundred opportunities of setting him right and putting him down, and i was not slow to profit by them.
the night passed, and the next day, after dinner, redruth and i were afoot again and on the road.
i said good-bye to mother and the cove where i had lived since i was born, and the dear old admiral benbow -- since he was repainted, no longer quite so dear.
one of my last thoughts was of the captain, who had so often strode along the beach with his cocked hat, his sabre-cut cheek, and his old brass telescope.
next moment we had turned the corner and my home was out of sight.
the mail picked us up about dusk at the royal george on the heath.
i was wedged in between redruth and a stout old gentleman, and in spite of the swift motion and the cold night air, i must have dozed a great deal from the very first, and then slept like a log up hill and down dale through stage after stage, for when i was awakened at last it was by a punch in the ribs, and i opened my eyes to find that we were standing still before a large building in a city street and that the day had already broken a long time.
""where are we?"
i asked.
""bristol," said tom.
""get down."
mr. trelawney had taken up his residence at an inn far down the docks to superintend the work upon the schooner.
thither we had now to walk, and our way, to my great delight, lay along the quays and beside the great multitude of ships of all sizes and rigs and nations.
in one, sailors were singing at their work, in another there were men aloft, high over my head, hanging to threads that seemed no thicker than a spider's.
though i had lived by the shore all my life, i seemed never to have been near the sea till then.
the smell of tar and salt was something new.
i saw the most wonderful figureheads, that had all been far over the ocean.
i saw, besides, many old sailors, with rings in their ears, and whiskers curled in ringlets, and tarry pigtails, and their swaggering, clumsy sea-walk; and if i had seen as many kings or archbishops i could not have been more delighted.
and i was going to sea myself, to sea in a schooner, with a piping boatswain and pig-tailed singing seamen, to sea, bound for an unknown island, and to seek for buried treasure!
while i was still in this delightful dream, we came suddenly in front of a large inn and met squire trelawney, all dressed out like a sea-officer, in stout blue cloth, coming out of the door with a smile on his face and a capital imitation of a sailor's walk.
""here you are," he cried, "and the doctor came last night from london.
bravo!
the ship's company complete!"
""oh, sir," cried i, "when do we sail?"
""sail!"
says he.
""we sail tomorrow!"
8 at the sign of the spy-glass when i had done breakfasting the squire gave me a note addressed to john silver, at the sign of the spy-glass, and told me i should easily find the place by following the line of the docks and keeping a bright lookout for a little tavern with a large brass telescope for sign.
i set off, overjoyed at this opportunity to see some more of the ships and seamen, and picked my way among a great crowd of people and carts and bales, for the dock was now at its busiest, until i found the tavern in question.
it was a bright enough little place of entertainment.
the sign was newly painted; the windows had neat red curtains; the floor was cleanly sanded.
there was a street on each side and an open door on both, which made the large, low room pretty clear to see in, in spite of clouds of tobacco smoke.
the customers were mostly seafaring men, and they talked so loudly that i hung at the door, almost afraid to enter.
as i was waiting, a man came out of a side room, and at a glance i was sure he must be long john.
his left leg was cut off close by the hip, and under the left shoulder he carried a crutch, which he managed with wonderful dexterity, hopping about upon it like a bird.
he was very tall and strong, with a face as big as a ham -- plain and pale, but intelligent and smiling.
indeed, he seemed in the most cheerful spirits, whistling as he moved about among the tables, with a merry word or a slap on the shoulder for the more favoured of his guests.
now, to tell you the truth, from the very first mention of long john in squire trelawney's letter i had taken a fear in my mind that he might prove to be the very one-legged sailor whom i had watched for so long at the old benbow.
but one look at the man before me was enough.
i had seen the captain, and black dog, and the blind man, pew, and i thought i knew what a buccaneer was like -- a very different creature, according to me, from this clean and pleasant-tempered landlord.
i plucked up courage at once, crossed the threshold, and walked right up to the man where he stood, propped on his crutch, talking to a customer.
""mr. silver, sir?"
i asked, holding out the note.
""yes, my lad," said he; "such is my name, to be sure.
and who may you be?"
and then as he saw the squire's letter, he seemed to me to give something almost like a start.
""oh!"
said he, quite loud, and offering his hand.
""i see.
you are our new cabin-boy; pleased i am to see you."
and he took my hand in his large firm grasp.
just then one of the customers at the far side rose suddenly and made for the door.
it was close by him, and he was out in the street in a moment.
but his hurry had attracted my notice, and i recognized him at glance.
it was the tallow-faced man, wanting two fingers, who had come first to the admiral benbow.
""oh," i cried, "stop him!
it's black dog!"
""i do n't care two coppers who he is," cried silver.
""but he has n't paid his score.
harry, run and catch him."
one of the others who was nearest the door leaped up and started in pursuit.
""if he were admiral hawke he shall pay his score," cried silver; and then, relinquishing my hand, "who did you say he was?"
he asked.
""black what?"
""dog, sir," said i. "has mr. trelawney not told you of the buccaneers?
he was one of them."
""so?"
cried silver.
""in my house!
ben, run and help harry.
one of those swabs, was he?
was that you drinking with him, morgan?
step up here."
the man whom he called morgan -- an old, grey-haired, mahogany-faced sailor -- came forward pretty sheepishly, rolling his quid.
""now, morgan," said long john very sternly, "you never clapped your eyes on that black -- black dog before, did you, now?"
""not i, sir," said morgan with a salute.
""you did n't know his name, did you?"
""no, sir."
""by the powers, tom morgan, it's as good for you!"
exclaimed the landlord.
""if you had been mixed up with the like of that, you would never have put another foot in my house, you may lay to that.
and what was he saying to you?"
""i do n't rightly know, sir," answered morgan.
""do you call that a head on your shoulders, or a blessed dead-eye?"
cried long john.
""do n't rightly know, do n't you!
perhaps you do n't happen to rightly know who you was speaking to, perhaps?
come, now, what was he jawing -- v "yages, cap'n s, ships?
pipe up!
what was it?"
""we was a-talkin" of keel-hauling," answered morgan.
""keel-hauling, was you?
and a mighty suitable thing, too, and you may lay to that.
get back to your place for a lubber, tom."
and then, as morgan rolled back to his seat, silver added to me in a confidential whisper that was very flattering, as i thought, "he's quite an honest man, tom morgan, on" y stupid.
and now," he ran on again, aloud, "let's see -- black dog?
no, i do n't know the name, not i.
yet i kind of think i've -- yes, i've seen the swab.
he used to come here with a blind beggar, he used."
""that he did, you may be sure," said i. "i knew that blind man too.
his name was pew."
""it was!"
cried silver, now quite excited.
""pew!
that were his name for certain.
ah, he looked a shark, he did!
if we run down this black dog, now, there'll be news for cap'n trelawney!
ben's a good runner; few seamen run better than ben.
he should run him down, hand over hand, by the powers!
he talked o" keel-hauling, did he?
i'll keel-haul him!"
all the time he was jerking out these phrases he was stumping up and down the tavern on his crutch, slapping tables with his hand, and giving such a show of excitement as would have convinced an old bailey judge or a bow street runner.
my suspicions had been thoroughly reawakened on finding black dog at the spy-glass, and i watched the cook narrowly.
but he was too deep, and too ready, and too clever for me, and by the time the two men had come back out of breath and confessed that they had lost the track in a crowd, and been scolded like thieves, i would have gone bail for the innocence of long john silver.
""see here, now, hawkins," said he, "here's a blessed hard thing on a man like me, now, ai n't it?
there's cap'n trelawney -- what's he to think?
here i have this confounded son of a dutchman sitting in my own house drinking of my own rum!
here you comes and tells me of it plain; and here i let him give us all the slip before my blessed deadlights!
now, hawkins, you do me justice with the cap'n.
you're a lad, you are, but you're as smart as paint.
i see that when you first come in.
now, here it is: what could i do, with this old timber i hobble on?
when i was an a b master mariner i'd have come up alongside of him, hand over hand, and broached him to in a brace of old shakes, i would; but now --" and then, all of a sudden, he stopped, and his jaw dropped as though he had remembered something.
""the score!"
he burst out.
""three goes o" rum!
why, shiver my timbers, if i had n't forgotten my score!"
and falling on a bench, he laughed until the tears ran down his cheeks.
i could not help joining, and we laughed together, peal after peal, until the tavern rang again.
""why, what a precious old sea-calf i am!"
he said at last, wiping his cheeks.
""you and me should get on well, hawkins, for i'll take my davy i should be rated ship's boy.
but come now, stand by to go about.
this wo n't do.
dooty is dooty, messmates.
i'll put on my old cockerel hat, and step along of you to cap'n trelawney, and report this here affair.
for mind you, it's serious, young hawkins; and neither you nor me's come out of it with what i should make so bold as to call credit.
nor you neither, says you; not smart -- none of the pair of us smart.
but dash my buttons!
that was a good un about my score."
and he began to laugh again, and that so heartily, that though i did not see the joke as he did, i was again obliged to join him in his mirth.
on our little walk along the quays, he made himself the most interesting companion, telling me about the different ships that we passed by, their rig, tonnage, and nationality, explaining the work that was going forward -- how one was discharging, another taking in cargo, and a third making ready for sea -- and every now and then telling me some little anecdote of ships or seamen or repeating a nautical phrase till i had learned it perfectly.
i began to see that here was one of the best of possible shipmates.
when we got to the inn, the squire and dr. livesey were seated together, finishing a quart of ale with a toast in it, before they should go aboard the schooner on a visit of inspection.
long john told the story from first to last, with a great deal of spirit and the most perfect truth.
""that was how it were, now, were n't it, hawkins?"
he would say, now and again, and i could always bear him entirely out.
the two gentlemen regretted that black dog had got away, but we all agreed there was nothing to be done, and after he had been complimented, long john took up his crutch and departed.
""all hands aboard by four this afternoon," shouted the squire after him.
""aye, aye, sir," cried the cook, in the passage.
""well, squire," said dr. livesey, "i do n't put much faith in your discoveries, as a general thing; but i will say this, john silver suits me."
""the man's a perfect trump," declared the squire.
""and now," added the doctor, "jim may come on board with us, may he not?"
""to be sure he may," says squire.
""take your hat, hawkins, and we'll see the ship."
9 powder and arms the hispaniola lay some way out, and we went under the figureheads and round the sterns of many other ships, and their cables sometimes grated underneath our keel, and sometimes swung above us.
at last, however, we got alongside, and were met and saluted as we stepped aboard by the mate, mr. arrow, a brown old sailor with earrings in his ears and a squint.
he and the squire were very thick and friendly, but i soon observed that things were not the same between mr. trelawney and the captain.
this last was a sharp-looking man who seemed angry with everything on board and was soon to tell us why, for we had hardly got down into the cabin when a sailor followed us.
""captain smollett, sir, axing to speak with you," said he.
""i am always at the captain's orders.
show him in," said the squire.
the captain, who was close behind his messenger, entered at once and shut the door behind him.
""well, captain smollett, what have you to say?
all well, i hope; all shipshape and seaworthy?"
""well, sir," said the captain, "better speak plain, i believe, even at the risk of offence.
i do n't like this cruise; i do n't like the men; and i do n't like my officer.
that's short and sweet."
""perhaps, sir, you do n't like the ship?"
inquired the squire, very angry, as i could see.
""i ca n't speak as to that, sir, not having seen her tried," said the captain.
""she seems a clever craft; more i ca n't say."
""possibly, sir, you may not like your employer, either?"
says the squire.
but here dr. livesey cut in.
""stay a bit," said he, "stay a bit.
no use of such questions as that but to produce ill feeling.
the captain has said too much or he has said too little, and i'm bound to say that i require an explanation of his words.
you do n't, you say, like this cruise.
now, why?"
""i was engaged, sir, on what we call sealed orders, to sail this ship for that gentleman where he should bid me," said the captain.
""so far so good.
but now i find that every man before the mast knows more than i do.
i do n't call that fair, now, do you?"
""no," said dr. livesey, "i do n't."
""next," said the captain, "i learn we are going after treasure -- hear it from my own hands, mind you.
now, treasure is ticklish work; i do n't like treasure voyages on any account, and i do n't like them, above all, when they are secret and when -lrb- begging your pardon, mr. trelawney -rrb- the secret has been told to the parrot."
""silver's parrot?"
asked the squire.
""it's a way of speaking," said the captain.
""blabbed, i mean.
it's my belief neither of you gentlemen know what you are about, but i'll tell you my way of it -- life or death, and a close run."
""that is all clear, and, i dare say, true enough," replied dr. livesey.
""we take the risk, but we are not so ignorant as you believe us.
next, you say you do n't like the crew.
are they not good seamen?"
""i do n't like them, sir," returned captain smollett.
""and i think i should have had the choosing of my own hands, if you go to that."
""perhaps you should," replied the doctor.
""my friend should, perhaps, have taken you along with him; but the slight, if there be one, was unintentional.
and you do n't like mr. arrow?"
""i do n't, sir.
i believe he's a good seaman, but he's too free with the crew to be a good officer.
a mate should keep himself to himself -- should n't drink with the men before the mast!"
""do you mean he drinks?"
cried the squire.
""no, sir," replied the captain, "only that he's too familiar."
""well, now, and the short and long of it, captain?"
asked the doctor.
""tell us what you want."
""well, gentlemen, are you determined to go on this cruise?"
""like iron," answered the squire.
""very good," said the captain.
""then, as you've heard me very patiently, saying things that i could not prove, hear me a few words more.
they are putting the powder and the arms in the fore hold.
now, you have a good place under the cabin; why not put them there?
-- first point.
then, you are bringing four of your own people with you, and they tell me some of them are to be berthed forward.
why not give them the berths here beside the cabin?
-- second point."
""any more?"
asked mr. trelawney.
""one more," said the captain.
""there's been too much blabbing already."
""far too much," agreed the doctor.
""i'll tell you what i've heard myself," continued captain smollett: "that you have a map of an island, that there's crosses on the map to show where treasure is, and that the island lies --" and then he named the latitude and longitude exactly.
""i never told that," cried the squire, "to a soul!"
""the hands know it, sir," returned the captain.
""livesey, that must have been you or hawkins," cried the squire.
""it does n't much matter who it was," replied the doctor.
and i could see that neither he nor the captain paid much regard to mr. trelawney's protestations.
neither did i, to be sure, he was so loose a talker; yet in this case i believe he was really right and that nobody had told the situation of the island.
""well, gentlemen," continued the captain, "i do n't know who has this map; but i make it a point, it shall be kept secret even from me and mr. arrow.
otherwise i would ask you to let me resign."
""i see," said the doctor.
""you wish us to keep this matter dark and to make a garrison of the stern part of the ship, manned with my friend's own people, and provided with all the arms and powder on board.
in other words, you fear a mutiny."
""sir," said captain smollett, "with no intention to take offence, i deny your right to put words into my mouth.
no captain, sir, would be justified in going to sea at all if he had ground enough to say that.
as for mr. arrow, i believe him thoroughly honest; some of the men are the same; all may be for what i know.
but i am responsible for the ship's safety and the life of every man jack aboard of her.
i see things going, as i think, not quite right.
and i ask you to take certain precautions or let me resign my berth.
and that's all."
""captain smollett," began the doctor with a smile, "did ever you hear the fable of the mountain and the mouse?
you'll excuse me, i dare say, but you remind me of that fable.
when you came in here, i'll stake my wig, you meant more than this."
""doctor," said the captain, "you are smart.
when i came in here i meant to get discharged.
i had no thought that mr. trelawney would hear a word."
""no more i would," cried the squire.
""had livesey not been here i should have seen you to the deuce.
as it is, i have heard you.
i will do as you desire, but i think the worse of you."
""that's as you please, sir," said the captain.
""you'll find i do my duty."
and with that he took his leave.
""trelawney," said the doctor, "contrary to all my notions, i believed you have managed to get two honest men on board with you -- that man and john silver."
""silver, if you like," cried the squire; "but as for that intolerable humbug, i declare i think his conduct unmanly, unsailorly, and downright un-english."
""well," says the doctor, "we shall see."
when we came on deck, the men had begun already to take out the arms and powder, yo-ho-ing at their work, while the captain and mr. arrow stood by superintending.
the new arrangement was quite to my liking.
the whole schooner had been overhauled; six berths had been made astern out of what had been the after-part of the main hold; and this set of cabins was only joined to the galley and forecastle by a sparred passage on the port side.
it had been originally meant that the captain, mr. arrow, hunter, joyce, the doctor, and the squire were to occupy these six berths.
now redruth and i were to get two of them and mr. arrow and the captain were to sleep on deck in the companion, which had been enlarged on each side till you might almost have called it a round-house.
very low it was still, of course; but there was room to swing two hammocks, and even the mate seemed pleased with the arrangement.
even he, perhaps, had been doubtful as to the crew, but that is only guess, for as you shall hear, we had not long the benefit of his opinion.
we were all hard at work, changing the powder and the berths, when the last man or two, and long john along with them, came off in a shore-boat.
the cook came up the side like a monkey for cleverness, and as soon as he saw what was doing, "so ho, mates!"
says he.
""what's this?"
""we're a-changing of the powder, jack," answers one.
""why, by the powers," cried long john, "if we do, we'll miss the morning tide!"
""my orders!"
said the captain shortly.
""you may go below, my man.
hands will want supper."
""aye, aye, sir," answered the cook, and touching his forelock, he disappeared at once in the direction of his galley.
""that's a good man, captain," said the doctor.
""very likely, sir," replied captain smollett.
""easy with that, men -- easy," he ran on, to the fellows who were shifting the powder; and then suddenly observing me examining the swivel we carried amidships, a long brass nine, "here you, ship's boy," he cried, "out o" that!
off with you to the cook and get some work."
and then as i was hurrying off i heard him say, quite loudly, to the doctor, "i'll have no favourites on my ship."
i assure you i was quite of the squire's way of thinking, and hated the captain deeply.
10 the voyage all that night we were in a great bustle getting things stowed in their place, and boatfuls of the squire's friends, mr. blandly and the like, coming off to wish him a good voyage and a safe return.
we never had a night at the admiral benbow when i had half the work; and i was dog-tired when, a little before dawn, the boatswain sounded his pipe and the crew began to man the capstan-bars.
i might have been twice as weary, yet i would not have left the deck, all was so new and interesting to me -- the brief commands, the shrill note of the whistle, the men bustling to their places in the glimmer of the ship's lanterns.
""now, barbecue, tip us a stave," cried one voice.
""the old one," cried another.
""aye, aye, mates," said long john, who was standing by, with his crutch under his arm, and at once broke out in the air and words i knew so well: "fifteen men on the dead man's chest --" and then the whole crew bore chorus: -- "yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
and at the third "ho!"
drove the bars before them with a will.
even at that exciting moment it carried me back to the old admiral benbow in a second, and i seemed to hear the voice of the captain piping in the chorus.
but soon the anchor was short up; soon it was hanging dripping at the bows; soon the sails began to draw, and the land and shipping to flit by on either side; and before i could lie down to snatch an hour of slumber the hispaniola had begun her voyage to the isle of treasure.
i am not going to relate that voyage in detail.
it was fairly prosperous.
the ship proved to be a good ship, the crew were capable seamen, and the captain thoroughly understood his business.
but before we came the length of treasure island, two or three things had happened which require to be known.
mr. arrow, first of all, turned out even worse than the captain had feared.
he had no command among the men, and people did what they pleased with him.
but that was by no means the worst of it, for after a day or two at sea he began to appear on deck with hazy eye, red cheeks, stuttering tongue, and other marks of drunkenness.
time after time he was ordered below in disgrace.
sometimes he fell and cut himself; sometimes he lay all day long in his little bunk at one side of the companion; sometimes for a day or two he would be almost sober and attend to his work at least passably.
in the meantime, we could never make out where he got the drink.
that was the ship's mystery.
watch him as we pleased, we could do nothing to solve it; and when we asked him to his face, he would only laugh if he were drunk, and if he were sober deny solemnly that he ever tasted anything but water.
he was not only useless as an officer and a bad influence amongst the men, but it was plain that at this rate he must soon kill himself outright, so nobody was much surprised, nor very sorry, when one dark night, with a head sea, he disappeared entirely and was seen no more.
""overboard!"
said the captain.
""well, gentlemen, that saves the trouble of putting him in irons."
but there we were, without a mate; and it was necessary, of course, to advance one of the men.
the boatswain, job anderson, was the likeliest man aboard, and though he kept his old title, he served in a way as mate.
mr. trelawney had followed the sea, and his knowledge made him very useful, for he often took a watch himself in easy weather.
and the coxswain, israel hands, was a careful, wily, old, experienced seaman who could be trusted at a pinch with almost anything.
he was a great confidant of long john silver, and so the mention of his name leads me on to speak of our ship's cook, barbecue, as the men called him.
aboard ship he carried his crutch by a lanyard round his neck, to have both hands as free as possible.
it was something to see him wedge the foot of the crutch against a bulkhead, and propped against it, yielding to every movement of the ship, get on with his cooking like someone safe ashore.
still more strange was it to see him in the heaviest of weather cross the deck.
he had a line or two rigged up to help him across the widest spaces -- long john's earrings, they were called; and he would hand himself from one place to another, now using the crutch, now trailing it alongside by the lanyard, as quickly as another man could walk.
yet some of the men who had sailed with him before expressed their pity to see him so reduced.
""he's no common man, barbecue," said the coxswain to me.
""he had good schooling in his young days and can speak like a book when so minded; and brave -- a lion's nothing alongside of long john!
i seen him grapple four and knock their heads together -- him unarmed."
all the crew respected and even obeyed him.
he had a way of talking to each and doing everybody some particular service.
to me he was unweariedly kind, and always glad to see me in the galley, which he kept as clean as a new pin, the dishes hanging up burnished and his parrot in a cage in one corner.
""come away, hawkins," he would say; "come and have a yarn with john.
nobody more welcome than yourself, my son.
sit you down and hear the news.
here's cap'n flint -- i calls my parrot cap'n flint, after the famous buccaneer -- here's cap'n flint predicting success to our v "yage.
was n't you, cap'n?"
and the parrot would say, with great rapidity, "pieces of eight!
pieces of eight!
pieces of eight!"
till you wondered that it was not out of breath, or till john threw his handkerchief over the cage.
""now, that bird," he would say, "is, maybe, two hundred years old, hawkins -- they live forever mostly; and if anybody's seen more wickedness, it must be the devil himself.
she's sailed with england, the great cap'n england, the pirate.
she's been at madagascar, and at malabar, and surinam, and providence, and portobello.
she was at the fishing up of the wrecked plate ships.
it's there she learned "pieces of eight," and little wonder; three hundred and fifty thousand of'em, hawkins!
she was at the boarding of the viceroy of the indies out of goa, she was; and to look at her you would think she was a babby.
but you smelt powder -- did n't you, cap'n?"
""stand by to go about," the parrot would scream.
""ah, she's a handsome craft, she is," the cook would say, and give her sugar from his pocket, and then the bird would peck at the bars and swear straight on, passing belief for wickedness.
""there," john would add, "you ca n't touch pitch and not be mucked, lad.
here's this poor old innocent bird o" mine swearing blue fire, and none the wiser, you may lay to that.
she would swear the same, in a manner of speaking, before chaplain."
and john would touch his forelock with a solemn way he had that made me think he was the best of men.
in the meantime, the squire and captain smollett were still on pretty distant terms with one another.
the squire made no bones about the matter; he despised the captain.
the captain, on his part, never spoke but when he was spoken to, and then sharp and short and dry, and not a word wasted.
he owned, when driven into a corner, that he seemed to have been wrong about the crew, that some of them were as brisk as he wanted to see and all had behaved fairly well.
as for the ship, he had taken a downright fancy to her.
""she'll lie a point nearer the wind than a man has a right to expect of his own married wife, sir.
but," he would add, "all i say is, we're not home again, and i do n't like the cruise."
the squire, at this, would turn away and march up and down the deck, chin in air.
""a trifle more of that man," he would say, "and i shall explode."
we had some heavy weather, which only proved the qualities of the hispaniola.
every man on board seemed well content, and they must have been hard to please if they had been otherwise, for it is my belief there was never a ship's company so spoiled since noah put to sea.
double grog was going on the least excuse; there was duff on odd days, as, for instance, if the squire heard it was any man's birthday, and always a barrel of apples standing broached in the waist for anyone to help himself that had a fancy.
""never knew good come of it yet," the captain said to dr. livesey.
""spoil forecastle hands, make devils.
that's my belief."
but good did come of the apple barrel, as you shall hear, for if it had not been for that, we should have had no note of warning and might all have perished by the hand of treachery.
this was how it came about.
we had run up the trades to get the wind of the island we were after -- i am not allowed to be more plain -- and now we were running down for it with a bright lookout day and night.
it was about the last day of our outward voyage by the largest computation; some time that night, or at latest before noon of the morrow, we should sight the treasure island.
we were heading s.s.w. and had a steady breeze abeam and a quiet sea.
the hispaniola rolled steadily, dipping her bowsprit now and then with a whiff of spray.
all was drawing alow and aloft; everyone was in the bravest spirits because we were now so near an end of the first part of our adventure.
now, just after sundown, when all my work was over and i was on my way to my berth, it occurred to me that i should like an apple.
i ran on deck.
the watch was all forward looking out for the island.
the man at the helm was watching the luff of the sail and whistling away gently to himself, and that was the only sound excepting the swish of the sea against the bows and around the sides of the ship.
in i got bodily into the apple barrel, and found there was scarce an apple left; but sitting down there in the dark, what with the sound of the waters and the rocking movement of the ship, i had either fallen asleep or was on the point of doing so when a heavy man sat down with rather a clash close by.
the barrel shook as he leaned his shoulders against it, and i was just about to jump up when the man began to speak.
it was silver's voice, and before i had heard a dozen words, i would not have shown myself for all the world, but lay there, trembling and listening, in the extreme of fear and curiosity, for from these dozen words i understood that the lives of all the honest men aboard depended upon me alone.
11 what i heard in the apple barrel "no, not i," said silver.
""flint was cap'n; i was quartermaster, along of my timber leg.
the same broadside i lost my leg, old pew lost his deadlights.
it was a master surgeon, him that ampytated me -- out of college and all -- latin by the bucket, and what not; but he was hanged like a dog, and sun-dried like the rest, at corso castle.
that was roberts" men, that was, and comed of changing names to their ships -- royal fortune and so on.
now, what a ship was christened, so let her stay, i says.
so it was with the cassandra, as brought us all safe home from malabar, after england took the viceroy of the indies; so it was with the old walrus, flint's old ship, as i've seen amuck with the red blood and fit to sink with gold."
""ah!"
cried another voice, that of the youngest hand on board, and evidently full of admiration.
""he was the flower of the flock, was flint!"
""davis was a man too, by all accounts," said silver.
""i never sailed along of him; first with england, then with flint, that's my story; and now here on my own account, in a manner of speaking.
i laid by nine hundred safe, from england, and two thousand after flint.
that ai n't bad for a man before the mast -- all safe in bank.
"tai n't earning now, it's saving does it, you may lay to that.
where's all england's men now?
i dunno.
where's flint's?
why, most on'em aboard here, and glad to get the duff -- been begging before that, some on'em.
old pew, as had lost his sight, and might have thought shame, spends twelve hundred pound in a year, like a lord in parliament.
where is he now?
well, he's dead now and under hatches; but for two year before that, shiver my timbers, the man was starving!
he begged, and he stole, and he cut throats, and starved at that, by the powers!"
""well, it ai n't much use, after all," said the young seaman."
"tai n't much use for fools, you may lay to it -- that, nor nothing," cried silver.
""but now, you look here: you're young, you are, but you're as smart as paint.
i see that when i set my eyes on you, and i'll talk to you like a man."
you may imagine how i felt when i heard this abominable old rogue addressing another in the very same words of flattery as he had used to myself.
i think, if i had been able, that i would have killed him through the barrel.
meantime, he ran on, little supposing he was overheard.
""here it is about gentlemen of fortune.
they lives rough, and they risk swinging, but they eat and drink like fighting-cocks, and when a cruise is done, why, it's hundreds of pounds instead of hundreds of farthings in their pockets.
now, the most goes for rum and a good fling, and to sea again in their shirts.
but that's not the course i lay.
i puts it all away, some here, some there, and none too much anywheres, by reason of suspicion.
i'm fifty, mark you; once back from this cruise, i set up gentleman in earnest.
time enough too, says you.
ah, but i've lived easy in the meantime, never denied myself o" nothing heart desires, and slep" soft and ate dainty all my days but when at sea.
and how did i begin?
before the mast, like you!"
""well," said the other, "but all the other money's gone now, ai n't it?
you dare n't show face in bristol after this."
""why, where might you suppose it was?"
asked silver derisively.
""at bristol, in banks and places," answered his companion.
""it were," said the cook; "it were when we weighed anchor.
but my old missis has it all by now.
and the spy-glass is sold, lease and goodwill and rigging; and the old girl's off to meet me.
i would tell you where, for i trust you, but it'd make jealousy among the mates."
""and can you trust your missis?"
asked the other.
""gentlemen of fortune," returned the cook, "usually trusts little among themselves, and right they are, you may lay to it.
but i have a way with me, i have.
when a mate brings a slip on his cable -- one as knows me, i mean -- it wo n't be in the same world with old john.
there was some that was feared of pew, and some that was feared of flint; but flint his own self was feared of me.
feared he was, and proud.
they was the roughest crew afloat, was flint's; the devil himself would have been feared to go to sea with them.
well now, i tell you, i'm not a boasting man, and you seen yourself how easy i keep company, but when i was quartermaster, lambs was n't the word for flint's old buccaneers.
ah, you may be sure of yourself in old john's ship."
""well, i tell you now," replied the lad, "i did n't half a quarter like the job till i had this talk with you, john; but there's my hand on it now."
""and a brave lad you were, and smart too," answered silver, shaking hands so heartily that all the barrel shook, "and a finer figurehead for a gentleman of fortune i never clapped my eyes on."
by this time i had begun to understand the meaning of their terms.
by a "gentleman of fortune" they plainly meant neither more nor less than a common pirate, and the little scene that i had overheard was the last act in the corruption of one of the honest hands -- perhaps of the last one left aboard.
but on this point i was soon to be relieved, for silver giving a little whistle, a third man strolled up and sat down by the party.
""dick's square," said silver.
""oh, i know'd dick was square," returned the voice of the coxswain, israel hands.
""he's no fool, is dick."
and he turned his quid and spat.
""but look here," he went on, "here's what i want to know, barbecue: how long are we a-going to stand off and on like a blessed bumboat?
i've had a "most enough o" cap'n smollett; he's hazed me long enough, by thunder!
i want to go into that cabin, i do.
i want their pickles and wines, and that."
""israel," said silver, "your head ai n't much account, nor ever was.
but you're able to hear, i reckon; leastways, your ears is big enough.
now, here's what i say: you'll berth forward, and you'll live hard, and you'll speak soft, and you'll keep sober till i give the word; and you may lay to that, my son."
""well, i do n't say no, do i?"
growled the coxswain.
""what i say is, when?
that's what i say."
""when!
by the powers!"
cried silver.
""well now, if you want to know, i'll tell you when.
the last moment i can manage, and that's when.
here's a first-rate seaman, cap'n smollett, sails the blessed ship for us.
here's this squire and doctor with a map and such -- i do n't know where it is, do i?
no more do you, says you.
well then, i mean this squire and doctor shall find the stuff, and help us to get it aboard, by the powers.
then we'll see.
if i was sure of you all, sons of double dutchmen, i'd have cap'n smollett navigate us half-way back again before i struck."
""why, we're all seamen aboard here, i should think," said the lad dick.
""we're all forecastle hands, you mean," snapped silver.
""we can steer a course, but who's to set one?
that's what all you gentlemen split on, first and last.
if i had my way, i'd have cap'n smollett work us back into the trades at least; then we'd have no blessed miscalculations and a spoonful of water a day.
but i know the sort you are.
i'll finish with'em at the island, as soon's the blunt's on board, and a pity it is.
but you're never happy till you're drunk.
split my sides, i've a sick heart to sail with the likes of you!"
""easy all, long john," cried israel.
""who's a-crossin" of you?"
""why, how many tall ships, think ye, now, have i seen laid aboard?
and how many brisk lads drying in the sun at execution dock?"
cried silver.
""and all for this same hurry and hurry and hurry.
you hear me?
i seen a thing or two at sea, i have.
if you would on" y lay your course, and a p "int to windward, you would ride in carriages, you would.
but not you!
i know you.
you'll have your mouthful of rum tomorrow, and go hang."
""everybody knowed you was a kind of a chapling, john; but there's others as could hand and steer as well as you," said israel.
""they liked a bit o" fun, they did.
they was n't so high and dry, nohow, but took their fling, like jolly companions every one."
""so?"
says silver.
""well, and where are they now?
pew was that sort, and he died a beggar-man.
flint was, and he died of rum at savannah.
ah, they was a sweet crew, they was!
on "y, where are they?"
""but," asked dick, "when we do lay'em athwart, what are we to do with'em, anyhow?"
""there's the man for me!"
cried the cook admiringly.
""that's what i call business.
well, what would you think?
put'em ashore like maroons?
that would have been england's way.
or cut'em down like that much pork?
that would have been flint's, or billy bones's."
""billy was the man for that," said israel."
"dead men do n't bite," says he.
well, he's dead now hisself; he knows the long and short on it now; and if ever a rough hand come to port, it was billy."
""right you are," said silver; "rough and ready.
but mark you here, i'm an easy man -- i'm quite the gentleman, says you; but this time it's serious.
dooty is dooty, mates.
i give my vote -- death.
when i'm in parlyment and riding in my coach, i do n't want none of these sea-lawyers in the cabin a-coming home, unlooked for, like the devil at prayers.
wait is what i say; but when the time comes, why, let her rip!"
""john," cries the coxswain, "you're a man!"
""you'll say so, israel when you see," said silver.
""only one thing i claim -- i claim trelawney.
i'll wring his calf's head off his body with these hands, dick!"
he added, breaking off.
""you just jump up, like a sweet lad, and get me an apple, to wet my pipe like."
you may fancy the terror i was in!
i should have leaped out and run for it if i had found the strength, but my limbs and heart alike misgave me.
i heard dick begin to rise, and then someone seemingly stopped him, and the voice of hands exclaimed, "oh, stow that!
do n't you get sucking of that bilge, john.
let's have a go of the rum."
""dick," said silver, "i trust you.
i've a gauge on the keg, mind.
there's the key; you fill a pannikin and bring it up."
terrified as i was, i could not help thinking to myself that this must have been how mr. arrow got the strong waters that destroyed him.
dick was gone but a little while, and during his absence israel spoke straight on in the cook's ear.
it was but a word or two that i could catch, and yet i gathered some important news, for besides other scraps that tended to the same purpose, this whole clause was audible: "not another man of them'll jine."
hence there were still faithful men on board.
when dick returned, one after another of the trio took the pannikin and drank -- one "to luck," another with a "here's to old flint," and silver himself saying, in a kind of song, "here's to ourselves, and hold your luff, plenty of prizes and plenty of duff."
just then a sort of brightness fell upon me in the barrel, and looking up, i found the moon had risen and was silvering the mizzen-top and shining white on the luff of the fore-sail; and almost at the same time the voice of the lookout shouted, "land ho!"
12 council of war there was a great rush of feet across the deck.
i could hear people tumbling up from the cabin and the forecastle, and slipping in an instant outside my barrel, i dived behind the fore-sail, made a double towards the stern, and came out upon the open deck in time to join hunter and dr. livesey in the rush for the weather bow.
there all hands were already congregated.
a belt of fog had lifted almost simultaneously with the appearance of the moon.
away to the south-west of us we saw two low hills, about a couple of miles apart, and rising behind one of them a third and higher hill, whose peak was still buried in the fog.
all three seemed sharp and conical in figure.
so much i saw, almost in a dream, for i had not yet recovered from my horrid fear of a minute or two before.
and then i heard the voice of captain smollett issuing orders.
the hispaniola was laid a couple of points nearer the wind and now sailed a course that would just clear the island on the east.
""and now, men," said the captain, when all was sheeted home, "has any one of you ever seen that land ahead?"
""i have, sir," said silver.
""i've watered there with a trader i was cook in."
""the anchorage is on the south, behind an islet, i fancy?"
asked the captain.
""yes, sir; skeleton island they calls it.
it were a main place for pirates once, and a hand we had on board knowed all their names for it.
that hill to the nor "ard they calls the fore-mast hill; there are three hills in a row running south "ard -- fore, main, and mizzen, sir.
but the main -- that's the big un, with the cloud on it -- they usually calls the spy-glass, by reason of a lookout they kept when they was in the anchorage cleaning, for it's there they cleaned their ships, sir, asking your pardon."
""i have a chart here," says captain smollett.
""see if that's the place."
long john's eyes burned in his head as he took the chart, but by the fresh look of the paper i knew he was doomed to disappointment.
this was not the map we found in billy bones's chest, but an accurate copy, complete in all things -- names and heights and soundings -- with the single exception of the red crosses and the written notes.
sharp as must have been his annoyance, silver had the strength of mind to hide it.
""yes, sir," said he, "this is the spot, to be sure, and very prettily drawed out.
who might have done that, i wonder?
the pirates were too ignorant, i reckon.
aye, here it is: "capt. kidd's anchorage" -- just the name my shipmate called it.
there's a strong current runs along the south, and then away nor "ard up the west coast.
right you was, sir," says he, "to haul your wind and keep the weather of the island.
leastways, if such was your intention as to enter and careen, and there ai n't no better place for that in these waters."
""thank you, my man," says captain smollett.
""i'll ask you later on to give us a help.
you may go."
i was surprised at the coolness with which john avowed his knowledge of the island, and i own i was half-frightened when i saw him drawing nearer to myself.
he did not know, to be sure, that i had overheard his council from the apple barrel, and yet i had by this time taken such a horror of his cruelty, duplicity, and power that i could scarce conceal a shudder when he laid his hand upon my arm.
""ah," says he, "this here is a sweet spot, this island -- a sweet spot for a lad to get ashore on.
you'll bathe, and you'll climb trees, and you'll hunt goats, you will; and you'll get aloft on them hills like a goat yourself.
why, it makes me young again.
i was going to forget my timber leg, i was.
it's a pleasant thing to be young and have ten toes, and you may lay to that.
when you want to go a bit of exploring, you just ask old john, and he'll put up a snack for you to take along."
and clapping me in the friendliest way upon the shoulder, he hobbled off forward and went below.
captain smollett, the squire, and dr. livesey were talking together on the quarter-deck, and anxious as i was to tell them my story, i durst not interrupt them openly.
while i was still casting about in my thoughts to find some probable excuse, dr. livesey called me to his side.
he had left his pipe below, and being a slave to tobacco, had meant that i should fetch it; but as soon as i was near enough to speak and not to be overheard, i broke immediately, "doctor, let me speak.
get the captain and squire down to the cabin, and then make some pretence to send for me.
i have terrible news."
the doctor changed countenance a little, but next moment he was master of himself.
""thank you, jim," said he quite loudly, "that was all i wanted to know," as if he had asked me a question.
and with that he turned on his heel and rejoined the other two.
they spoke together for a little, and though none of them started, or raised his voice, or so much as whistled, it was plain enough that dr. livesey had communicated my request, for the next thing that i heard was the captain giving an order to job anderson, and all hands were piped on deck.
""my lads," said captain smollett, "i've a word to say to you.
this land that we have sighted is the place we have been sailing for.
mr. trelawney, being a very open-handed gentleman, as we all know, has just asked me a word or two, and as i was able to tell him that every man on board had done his duty, alow and aloft, as i never ask to see it done better, why, he and i and the doctor are going below to the cabin to drink your health and luck, and you'll have grog served out for you to drink our health and luck.
i'll tell you what i think of this: i think it handsome.
and if you think as i do, you'll give a good sea-cheer for the gentleman that does it."
the cheer followed -- that was a matter of course; but it rang out so full and hearty that i confess i could hardly believe these same men were plotting for our blood.
""one more cheer for cap'n smollett," cried long john when the first had subsided.
and this also was given with a will.
on the top of that the three gentlemen went below, and not long after, word was sent forward that jim hawkins was wanted in the cabin.
i found them all three seated round the table, a bottle of spanish wine and some raisins before them, and the doctor smoking away, with his wig on his lap, and that, i knew, was a sign that he was agitated.
the stern window was open, for it was a warm night, and you could see the moon shining behind on the ship's wake.
""now, hawkins," said the squire, "you have something to say.
speak up."
i did as i was bid, and as short as i could make it, told the whole details of silver's conversation.
nobody interrupted me till i was done, nor did any one of the three of them make so much as a movement, but they kept their eyes upon my face from first to last.
""jim," said dr. livesey, "take a seat."
and they made me sit down at table beside them, poured me out a glass of wine, filled my hands with raisins, and all three, one after the other, and each with a bow, drank my good health, and their service to me, for my luck and courage.
""now, captain," said the squire, "you were right, and i was wrong.
i own myself an ass, and i await your orders."
""no more an ass than i, sir," returned the captain.
""i never heard of a crew that meant to mutiny but what showed signs before, for any man that had an eye in his head to see the mischief and take steps according.
but this crew," he added, "beats me."
""captain," said the doctor, "with your permission, that's silver.
a very remarkable man."
""he'd look remarkably well from a yard-arm, sir," returned the captain.
""but this is talk; this do n't lead to anything.
i see three or four points, and with mr. trelawney's permission, i'll name them."
""you, sir, are the captain.
it is for you to speak," says mr. trelawney grandly.
""first point," began mr. smollett.
""we must go on, because we ca n't turn back.
if i gave the word to go about, they would rise at once.
second point, we have time before us -- at least until this treasure's found.
third point, there are faithful hands.
now, sir, it's got to come to blows sooner or later, and what i propose is to take time by the forelock, as the saying is, and come to blows some fine day when they least expect it.
we can count, i take it, on your own home servants, mr. trelawney?"
""as upon myself," declared the squire.
""three," reckoned the captain; "ourselves make seven, counting hawkins here.
now, about the honest hands?"
""most likely trelawney's own men," said the doctor; "those he had picked up for himself before he lit on silver."
""nay," replied the squire.
""hands was one of mine."
""i did think i could have trusted hands," added the captain.
""and to think that they're all englishmen!"
broke out the squire.
""sir, i could find it in my heart to blow the ship up."
""well, gentlemen," said the captain, "the best that i can say is not much.
we must lay to, if you please, and keep a bright lookout.
it's trying on a man, i know.
it would be pleasanter to come to blows.
but there's no help for it till we know our men.
lay to, and whistle for a wind, that's my view."
""jim here," said the doctor, "can help us more than anyone.
the men are not shy with him, and jim is a noticing lad."
""hawkins, i put prodigious faith in you," added the squire.
i began to feel pretty desperate at this, for i felt altogether helpless; and yet, by an odd train of circumstances, it was indeed through me that safety came.
in the meantime, talk as we pleased, there were only seven out of the twenty-six on whom we knew we could rely; and out of these seven one was a boy, so that the grown men on our side were six to their nineteen.
part three -- my shore adventure 13 how my shore adventure began the appearance of the island when i came on deck next morning was altogether changed.
although the breeze had now utterly ceased, we had made a great deal of way during the night and were now lying becalmed about half a mile to the south-east of the low eastern coast.
grey-coloured woods covered a large part of the surface.
this even tint was indeed broken up by streaks of yellow sand-break in the lower lands, and by many tall trees of the pine family, out-topping the others -- some singly, some in clumps; but the general colouring was uniform and sad.
the hills ran up clear above the vegetation in spires of naked rock.
all were strangely shaped, and the spy-glass, which was by three or four hundred feet the tallest on the island, was likewise the strangest in configuration, running up sheer from almost every side and then suddenly cut off at the top like a pedestal to put a statue on.
the hispaniola was rolling scuppers under in the ocean swell.
the booms were tearing at the blocks, the rudder was banging to and fro, and the whole ship creaking, groaning, and jumping like a manufactory.
i had to cling tight to the backstay, and the world turned giddily before my eyes, for though i was a good enough sailor when there was way on, this standing still and being rolled about like a bottle was a thing i never learned to stand without a qualm or so, above all in the morning, on an empty stomach.
perhaps it was this -- perhaps it was the look of the island, with its grey, melancholy woods, and wild stone spires, and the surf that we could both see and hear foaming and thundering on the steep beach -- at least, although the sun shone bright and hot, and the shore birds were fishing and crying all around us, and you would have thought anyone would have been glad to get to land after being so long at sea, my heart sank, as the saying is, into my boots; and from the first look onward, i hated the very thought of treasure island.
we had a dreary morning's work before us, for there was no sign of any wind, and the boats had to be got out and manned, and the ship warped three or four miles round the corner of the island and up the narrow passage to the haven behind skeleton island.
i volunteered for one of the boats, where i had, of course, no business.
the heat was sweltering, and the men grumbled fiercely over their work.
anderson was in command of my boat, and instead of keeping the crew in order, he grumbled as loud as the worst.
""well," he said with an oath, "it's not forever."
i thought this was a very bad sign, for up to that day the men had gone briskly and willingly about their business; but the very sight of the island had relaxed the cords of discipline.
all the way in, long john stood by the steersman and conned the ship.
he knew the passage like the palm of his hand, and though the man in the chains got everywhere more water than was down in the chart, john never hesitated once.
""there's a strong scour with the ebb," he said, "and this here passage has been dug out, in a manner of speaking, with a spade."
we brought up just where the anchor was in the chart, about a third of a mile from each shore, the mainland on one side and skeleton island on the other.
the bottom was clean sand.
the plunge of our anchor sent up clouds of birds wheeling and crying over the woods, but in less than a minute they were down again and all was once more silent.
the place was entirely land-locked, buried in woods, the trees coming right down to high-water mark, the shores mostly flat, and the hilltops standing round at a distance in a sort of amphitheatre, one here, one there.
two little rivers, or rather two swamps, emptied out into this pond, as you might call it; and the foliage round that part of the shore had a kind of poisonous brightness.
from the ship we could see nothing of the house or stockade, for they were quite buried among trees; and if it had not been for the chart on the companion, we might have been the first that had ever anchored there since the island arose out of the seas.
there was not a breath of air moving, nor a sound but that of the surf booming half a mile away along the beaches and against the rocks outside.
a peculiar stagnant smell hung over the anchorage -- a smell of sodden leaves and rotting tree trunks.
i observed the doctor sniffing and sniffing, like someone tasting a bad egg.
""i do n't know about treasure," he said, "but i'll stake my wig there's fever here."
if the conduct of the men had been alarming in the boat, it became truly threatening when they had come aboard.
they lay about the deck growling together in talk.
the slightest order was received with a black look and grudgingly and carelessly obeyed.
even the honest hands must have caught the infection, for there was not one man aboard to mend another.
mutiny, it was plain, hung over us like a thunder-cloud.
and it was not only we of the cabin party who perceived the danger.
long john was hard at work going from group to group, spending himself in good advice, and as for example no man could have shown a better.
he fairly outstripped himself in willingness and civility; he was all smiles to everyone.
if an order were given, john would be on his crutch in an instant, with the cheeriest "aye, aye, sir!"
in the world; and when there was nothing else to do, he kept up one song after another, as if to conceal the discontent of the rest.
of all the gloomy features of that gloomy afternoon, this obvious anxiety on the part of long john appeared the worst.
we held a council in the cabin.
""sir," said the captain, "if i risk another order, the whole ship'll come about our ears by the run.
you see, sir, here it is.
i get a rough answer, do i not?
well, if i speak back, pikes will be going in two shakes; if i do n't, silver will see there's something under that, and the game's up.
now, we've only one man to rely on."
""and who is that?"
asked the squire.
""silver, sir," returned the captain; "he's as anxious as you and i to smother things up.
this is a tiff; he'd soon talk'em out of it if he had the chance, and what i propose to do is to give him the chance.
let's allow the men an afternoon ashore.
if they all go, why we'll fight the ship.
if they none of them go, well then, we hold the cabin, and god defend the right.
if some go, you mark my words, sir, silver'll bring'em aboard again as mild as lambs."
it was so decided; loaded pistols were served out to all the sure men; hunter, joyce, and redruth were taken into our confidence and received the news with less surprise and a better spirit than we had looked for, and then the captain went on deck and addressed the crew.
""my lads," said he, "we've had a hot day and are all tired and out of sorts.
a turn ashore'll hurt nobody -- the boats are still in the water; you can take the gigs, and as many as please may go ashore for the afternoon.
i'll fire a gun half an hour before sundown."
i believe the silly fellows must have thought they would break their shins over treasure as soon as they were landed, for they all came out of their sulks in a moment and gave a cheer that started the echo in a faraway hill and sent the birds once more flying and squalling round the anchorage.
the captain was too bright to be in the way.
he whipped out of sight in a moment, leaving silver to arrange the party, and i fancy it was as well he did so.
had he been on deck, he could no longer so much as have pretended not to understand the situation.
it was as plain as day.
silver was the captain, and a mighty rebellious crew he had of it.
the honest hands -- and i was soon to see it proved that there were such on board -- must have been very stupid fellows.
or rather, i suppose the truth was this, that all hands were disaffected by the example of the ringleaders -- only some more, some less; and a few, being good fellows in the main, could neither be led nor driven any further.
it is one thing to be idle and skulk and quite another to take a ship and murder a number of innocent men.
at last, however, the party was made up.
six fellows were to stay on board, and the remaining thirteen, including silver, began to embark.
then it was that there came into my head the first of the mad notions that contributed so much to save our lives.
if six men were left by silver, it was plain our party could not take and fight the ship; and since only six were left, it was equally plain that the cabin party had no present need of my assistance.
it occurred to me at once to go ashore.
in a jiffy i had slipped over the side and curled up in the fore-sheets of the nearest boat, and almost at the same moment she shoved off.
no one took notice of me, only the bow oar saying, "is that you, jim?
keep your head down."
but silver, from the other boat, looked sharply over and called out to know if that were me; and from that moment i began to regret what i had done.
the crews raced for the beach, but the boat i was in, having some start and being at once the lighter and the better manned, shot far ahead of her consort, and the bow had struck among the shore-side trees and i had caught a branch and swung myself out and plunged into the nearest thicket while silver and the rest were still a hundred yards behind.
""jim, jim!"
i heard him shouting.
but you may suppose i paid no heed; jumping, ducking, and breaking through, i ran straight before my nose till i could run no longer.
14 the first blow i was so pleased at having given the slip to long john that i began to enjoy myself and look around me with some interest on the strange land that i was in.
i had crossed a marshy tract full of willows, bulrushes, and odd, outlandish, swampy trees; and i had now come out upon the skirts of an open piece of undulating, sandy country, about a mile long, dotted with a few pines and a great number of contorted trees, not unlike the oak in growth, but pale in the foliage, like willows.
on the far side of the open stood one of the hills, with two quaint, craggy peaks shining vividly in the sun.
i now felt for the first time the joy of exploration.
the isle was uninhabited; my shipmates i had left behind, and nothing lived in front of me but dumb brutes and fowls.
i turned hither and thither among the trees.
here and there were flowering plants, unknown to me; here and there i saw snakes, and one raised his head from a ledge of rock and hissed at me with a noise not unlike the spinning of a top.
little did i suppose that he was a deadly enemy and that the noise was the famous rattle.
then i came to a long thicket of these oaklike trees -- live, or evergreen, oaks, i heard afterwards they should be called -- which grew low along the sand like brambles, the boughs curiously twisted, the foliage compact, like thatch.
the thicket stretched down from the top of one of the sandy knolls, spreading and growing taller as it went, until it reached the margin of the broad, reedy fen, through which the nearest of the little rivers soaked its way into the anchorage.
the marsh was steaming in the strong sun, and the outline of the spy-glass trembled through the haze.
all at once there began to go a sort of bustle among the bulrushes; a wild duck flew up with a quack, another followed, and soon over the whole surface of the marsh a great cloud of birds hung screaming and circling in the air.
i judged at once that some of my shipmates must be drawing near along the borders of the fen.
nor was i deceived, for soon i heard the very distant and low tones of a human voice, which, as i continued to give ear, grew steadily louder and nearer.
this put me in a great fear, and i crawled under cover of the nearest live-oak and squatted there, hearkening, as silent as a mouse.
another voice answered, and then the first voice, which i now recognized to be silver's, once more took up the story and ran on for a long while in a stream, only now and again interrupted by the other.
by the sound they must have been talking earnestly, and almost fiercely; but no distinct word came to my hearing.
at last the speakers seemed to have paused and perhaps to have sat down, for not only did they cease to draw any nearer, but the birds themselves began to grow more quiet and to settle again to their places in the swamp.
and now i began to feel that i was neglecting my business, that since i had been so foolhardy as to come ashore with these desperadoes, the least i could do was to overhear them at their councils, and that my plain and obvious duty was to draw as close as i could manage, under the favourable ambush of the crouching trees.
i could tell the direction of the speakers pretty exactly, not only by the sound of their voices but by the behaviour of the few birds that still hung in alarm above the heads of the intruders.
crawling on all fours, i made steadily but slowly towards them, till at last, raising my head to an aperture among the leaves, i could see clear down into a little green dell beside the marsh, and closely set about with trees, where long john silver and another of the crew stood face to face in conversation.
the sun beat full upon them.
silver had thrown his hat beside him on the ground, and his great, smooth, blond face, all shining with heat, was lifted to the other man's in a kind of appeal.
""mate," he was saying, "it's because i thinks gold dust of you -- gold dust, and you may lay to that!
if i had n't took to you like pitch, do you think i'd have been here a-warning of you?
all's up -- you ca n't make nor mend; it's to save your neck that i'm a-speaking, and if one of the wild uns knew it, where'd i be, tom -- now, tell me, where'd i be?"
""silver," said the other man -- and i observed he was not only red in the face, but spoke as hoarse as a crow, and his voice shook too, like a taut rope -- "silver," says he, "you're old, and you're honest, or has the name for it; and you've money too, which lots of poor sailors has n't; and you're brave, or i'm mistook.
and will you tell me you'll let yourself be led away with that kind of a mess of swabs?
not you!
as sure as god sees me, i'd sooner lose my hand.
if i turn agin my dooty --" and then all of a sudden he was interrupted by a noise.
i had found one of the honest hands -- well, here, at that same moment, came news of another.
far away out in the marsh there arose, all of a sudden, a sound like the cry of anger, then another on the back of it; and then one horrid, long-drawn scream.
the rocks of the spy-glass re-echoed it a score of times; the whole troop of marsh-birds rose again, darkening heaven, with a simultaneous whirr; and long after that death yell was still ringing in my brain, silence had re-established its empire, and only the rustle of the redescending birds and the boom of the distant surges disturbed the languor of the afternoon.
tom had leaped at the sound, like a horse at the spur, but silver had not winked an eye.
he stood where he was, resting lightly on his crutch, watching his companion like a snake about to spring.
""john!"
said the sailor, stretching out his hand.
""hands off!"
cried silver, leaping back a yard, as it seemed to me, with the speed and security of a trained gymnast.
""hands off, if you like, john silver," said the other.
""it's a black conscience that can make you feared of me.
but in heaven's name, tell me, what was that?"
""that?"
returned silver, smiling away, but warier than ever, his eye a mere pin-point in his big face, but gleaming like a crumb of glass.
""that?
oh, i reckon that'll be alan."
and at this point tom flashed out like a hero.
""alan!"
he cried.
""then rest his soul for a true seaman!
and as for you, john silver, long you've been a mate of mine, but you're mate of mine no more.
if i die like a dog, i'll die in my dooty.
you've killed alan, have you?
kill me too, if you can.
but i defies you."
and with that, this brave fellow turned his back directly on the cook and set off walking for the beach.
but he was not destined to go far.
with a cry john seized the branch of a tree, whipped the crutch out of his armpit, and sent that uncouth missile hurtling through the air.
it struck poor tom, point foremost, and with stunning violence, right between the shoulders in the middle of his back.
his hands flew up, he gave a sort of gasp, and fell.
whether he were injured much or little, none could ever tell.
like enough, to judge from the sound, his back was broken on the spot.
but he had no time given him to recover.
silver, agile as a monkey even without leg or crutch, was on the top of him next moment and had twice buried his knife up to the hilt in that defenceless body.
from my place of ambush, i could hear him pant aloud as he struck the blows.
i do not know what it rightly is to faint, but i do know that for the next little while the whole world swam away from before me in a whirling mist; silver and the birds, and the tall spy-glass hilltop, going round and round and topsy-turvy before my eyes, and all manner of bells ringing and distant voices shouting in my ear.
when i came again to myself the monster had pulled himself together, his crutch under his arm, his hat upon his head.
just before him tom lay motionless upon the sward; but the murderer minded him not a whit, cleansing his blood-stained knife the while upon a wisp of grass.
everything else was unchanged, the sun still shining mercilessly on the steaming marsh and the tall pinnacle of the mountain, and i could scarce persuade myself that murder had been actually done and a human life cruelly cut short a moment since before my eyes.
but now john put his hand into his pocket, brought out a whistle, and blew upon it several modulated blasts that rang far across the heated air.
i could not tell, of course, the meaning of the signal, but it instantly awoke my fears.
more men would be coming.
i might be discovered.
they had already slain two of the honest people; after tom and alan, might not i come next?
instantly i began to extricate myself and crawl back again, with what speed and silence i could manage, to the more open portion of the wood.
as i did so, i could hear hails coming and going between the old buccaneer and his comrades, and this sound of danger lent me wings.
as soon as i was clear of the thicket, i ran as i never ran before, scarce minding the direction of my flight, so long as it led me from the murderers; and as i ran, fear grew and grew upon me until it turned into a kind of frenzy.
indeed, could anyone be more entirely lost than i?
when the gun fired, how should i dare to go down to the boats among those fiends, still smoking from their crime?
would not the first of them who saw me wring my neck like a snipe's?
would not my absence itself be an evidence to them of my alarm, and therefore of my fatal knowledge?
it was all over, i thought.
good-bye to the hispaniola; good-bye to the squire, the doctor, and the captain!
there was nothing left for me but death by starvation or death by the hands of the mutineers.
all this while, as i say, i was still running, and without taking any notice, i had drawn near to the foot of the little hill with the two peaks and had got into a part of the island where the live-oaks grew more widely apart and seemed more like forest trees in their bearing and dimensions.
mingled with these were a few scattered pines, some fifty, some nearer seventy, feet high.
the air too smelt more freshly than down beside the marsh.
and here a fresh alarm brought me to a standstill with a thumping heart.
15 the man of the island from the side of the hill, which was here steep and stony, a spout of gravel was dislodged and fell rattling and bounding through the trees.
my eyes turned instinctively in that direction, and i saw a figure leap with great rapidity behind the trunk of a pine.
what it was, whether bear or man or monkey, i could in no wise tell.
it seemed dark and shaggy; more i knew not.
but the terror of this new apparition brought me to a stand.
i was now, it seemed, cut off upon both sides; behind me the murderers, before me this lurking nondescript.
and immediately i began to prefer the dangers that i knew to those i knew not.
silver himself appeared less terrible in contrast with this creature of the woods, and i turned on my heel, and looking sharply behind me over my shoulder, began to retrace my steps in the direction of the boats.
instantly the figure reappeared, and making a wide circuit, began to head me off.
i was tired, at any rate; but had i been as fresh as when i rose, i could see it was in vain for me to contend in speed with such an adversary.
from trunk to trunk the creature flitted like a deer, running manlike on two legs, but unlike any man that i had ever seen, stooping almost double as it ran.
yet a man it was, i could no longer be in doubt about that.
i began to recall what i had heard of cannibals.
i was within an ace of calling for help.
but the mere fact that he was a man, however wild, had somewhat reassured me, and my fear of silver began to revive in proportion.
i stood still, therefore, and cast about for some method of escape; and as i was so thinking, the recollection of my pistol flashed into my mind.
as soon as i remembered i was not defenceless, courage glowed again in my heart and i set my face resolutely for this man of the island and walked briskly towards him.
he was concealed by this time behind another tree trunk; but he must have been watching me closely, for as soon as i began to move in his direction he reappeared and took a step to meet me.
then he hesitated, drew back, came forward again, and at last, to my wonder and confusion, threw himself on his knees and held out his clasped hands in supplication.
at that i once more stopped.
""who are you?"
i asked.
""ben gunn," he answered, and his voice sounded hoarse and awkward, like a rusty lock.
""i'm poor ben gunn, i am; and i have n't spoke with a christian these three years."
i could now see that he was a white man like myself and that his features were even pleasing.
his skin, wherever it was exposed, was burnt by the sun; even his lips were black, and his fair eyes looked quite startling in so dark a face.
of all the beggar-men that i had seen or fancied, he was the chief for raggedness.
he was clothed with tatters of old ship's canvas and old sea-cloth, and this extraordinary patchwork was all held together by a system of the most various and incongruous fastenings, brass buttons, bits of stick, and loops of tarry gaskin.
about his waist he wore an old brass-buckled leather belt, which was the one thing solid in his whole accoutrement.
""three years!"
i cried.
""were you shipwrecked?"
""nay, mate," said he; "marooned."
i had heard the word, and i knew it stood for a horrible kind of punishment common enough among the buccaneers, in which the offender is put ashore with a little powder and shot and left behind on some desolate and distant island.
""marooned three years agone," he continued, "and lived on goats since then, and berries, and oysters.
wherever a man is, says i, a man can do for himself.
but, mate, my heart is sore for christian diet.
you might n't happen to have a piece of cheese about you, now?
no?
well, many's the long night i've dreamed of cheese -- toasted, mostly -- and woke up again, and here i were."
""if ever i can get aboard again," said i, "you shall have cheese by the stone."
all this time he had been feeling the stuff of my jacket, smoothing my hands, looking at my boots, and generally, in the intervals of his speech, showing a childish pleasure in the presence of a fellow creature.
but at my last words he perked up into a kind of startled slyness.
""if ever you can get aboard again, says you?"
he repeated.
""why, now, who's to hinder you?"
""not you, i know," was my reply.
""and right you was," he cried.
""now you -- what do you call yourself, mate?"
""jim," i told him.
""jim, jim," says he, quite pleased apparently.
""well, now, jim, i've lived that rough as you'd be ashamed to hear of.
now, for instance, you would n't think i had had a pious mother -- to look at me?"
he asked.
""why, no, not in particular," i answered.
""ah, well," said he, "but i had -- remarkable pious.
and i was a civil, pious boy, and could rattle off my catechism that fast, as you could n't tell one word from another.
and here's what it come to, jim, and it begun with chuck-farthen on the blessed grave-stones!
that's what it begun with, but it went further'n that; and so my mother told me, and predicked the whole, she did, the pious woman!
but it were providence that put me here.
i've thought it all out in this here lonely island, and i'm back on piety.
you do n't catch me tasting rum so much, but just a thimbleful for luck, of course, the first chance i have.
i'm bound i'll be good, and i see the way to.
and, jim" -- looking all round him and lowering his voice to a whisper -- "i'm rich."
i now felt sure that the poor fellow had gone crazy in his solitude, and i suppose i must have shown the feeling in my face, for he repeated the statement hotly: "rich!
rich!
i says.
and i'll tell you what: i'll make a man of you, jim.
ah, jim, you'll bless your stars, you will, you was the first that found me!"
and at this there came suddenly a lowering shadow over his face, and he tightened his grasp upon my hand and raised a forefinger threateningly before my eyes.
""now, jim, you tell me true: that ai n't flint's ship?"
he asked.
at this i had a happy inspiration.
i began to believe that i had found an ally, and i answered him at once.
""it's not flint's ship, and flint is dead; but i'll tell you true, as you ask me -- there are some of flint's hands aboard; worse luck for the rest of us."
""not a man -- with one -- leg?"
he gasped.
""silver?"
i asked.
""ah, silver!"
says he.
""that were his name."
""he's the cook, and the ringleader too."
he was still holding me by the wrist, and at that he give it quite a wring.
""if you was sent by long john," he said, "i'm as good as pork, and i know it.
but where was you, do you suppose?"
i had made my mind up in a moment, and by way of answer told him the whole story of our voyage and the predicament in which we found ourselves.
he heard me with the keenest interest, and when i had done he patted me on the head.
""you're a good lad, jim," he said; "and you're all in a clove hitch, ai n't you?
well, you just put your trust in ben gunn -- ben gunn's the man to do it.
would you think it likely, now, that your squire would prove a liberal-minded one in case of help -- him being in a clove hitch, as you remark?"
i told him the squire was the most liberal of men.
""aye, but you see," returned ben gunn, "i did n't mean giving me a gate to keep, and a suit of livery clothes, and such; that's not my mark, jim.
what i mean is, would he be likely to come down to the toon of, say one thousand pounds out of money that's as good as a man's own already?"
""i am sure he would," said i. "as it was, all hands were to share."
""and a passage home?"
he added with a look of great shrewdness.
""why," i cried, "the squire's a gentleman.
and besides, if we got rid of the others, we should want you to help work the vessel home."
""ah," said he, "so you would."
and he seemed very much relieved.
""now, i'll tell you what," he went on.
""so much i'll tell you, and no more.
i were in flint's ship when he buried the treasure; he and six along -- six strong seamen.
they was ashore nigh on a week, and us standing off and on in the old walrus.
one fine day up went the signal, and here come flint by himself in a little boat, and his head done up in a blue scarf.
the sun was getting up, and mortal white he looked about the cutwater.
but, there he was, you mind, and the six all dead -- dead and buried.
how he done it, not a man aboard us could make out.
it was battle, murder, and sudden death, leastways -- him against six.
billy bones was the mate; long john, he was quartermaster; and they asked him where the treasure was.
"ah," says he, "you can go ashore, if you like, and stay," he says; "but as for the ship, she'll beat up for more, by thunder!"
that's what he said.
""well, i was in another ship three years back, and we sighted this island.
"boys," said i, "here's flint's treasure; let's land and find it."
the cap'n was displeased at that, but my messmates were all of a mind and landed.
twelve days they looked for it, and every day they had the worse word for me, until one fine morning all hands went aboard.
"as for you, benjamin gunn," says they, "here's a musket," they says, "and a spade, and pick-axe.
you can stay here and find flint's money for yourself," they says.
""well, jim, three years have i been here, and not a bite of christian diet from that day to this.
but now, you look here; look at me.
do i look like a man before the mast?
no, says you.
nor i were n't, neither, i says."
and with that he winked and pinched me hard.
""just you mention them words to your squire, jim," he went on.
""nor he were n't, neither -- that's the words.
three years he were the man of this island, light and dark, fair and rain; and sometimes he would maybe think upon a prayer -lrb- says you -rrb-, and sometimes he would maybe think of his old mother, so be as she's alive -lrb- you'll say -rrb-; but the most part of gunn's time -lrb- this is what you'll say -rrb- -- the most part of his time was took up with another matter.
and then you'll give him a nip, like i do."
and he pinched me again in the most confidential manner.
""then," he continued, "then you'll up, and you'll say this: gunn is a good man -lrb- you'll say -rrb-, and he puts a precious sight more confidence -- a precious sight, mind that -- in a gen "leman born than in these gen "leman of fortune, having been one hisself."
""well," i said, "i do n't understand one word that you've been saying.
but that's neither here nor there; for how am i to get on board?"
""ah," said he, "that's the hitch, for sure.
well, there's my boat, that i made with my two hands.
i keep her under the white rock.
if the worst come to the worst, we might try that after dark.
hi!"
he broke out.
""what's that?"
for just then, although the sun had still an hour or two to run, all the echoes of the island awoke and bellowed to the thunder of a cannon.
""they have begun to fight!"
i cried.
""follow me."
and i began to run towards the anchorage, my terrors all forgotten, while close at my side the marooned man in his goatskins trotted easily and lightly.
""left, left," says he; "keep to your left hand, mate jim!
under the trees with you!
theer's where i killed my first goat.
they do n't come down here now; they're all mastheaded on them mountings for the fear of benjamin gunn.
ah!
and there's the cetemery" -- cemetery, he must have meant.
""you see the mounds?
i come here and prayed, nows and thens, when i thought maybe a sunday would be about doo.
it were n't quite a chapel, but it seemed more solemn like; and then, says you, ben gunn was short-handed -- no chapling, nor so much as a bible and a flag, you says."
so he kept talking as i ran, neither expecting nor receiving any answer.
the cannon-shot was followed after a considerable interval by a volley of small arms.
another pause, and then, not a quarter of a mile in front of me, i beheld the union jack flutter in the air above a wood.
part four -- the stockade 16 narrative continued by the doctor: how the ship was abandoned it was about half past one -- three bells in the sea phrase -- that the two boats went ashore from the hispaniola.
the captain, the squire, and i were talking matters over in the cabin.
had there been a breath of wind, we should have fallen on the six mutineers who were left aboard with us, slipped our cable, and away to sea.
but the wind was wanting; and to complete our helplessness, down came hunter with the news that jim hawkins had slipped into a boat and was gone ashore with the rest.
it never occurred to us to doubt jim hawkins, but we were alarmed for his safety.
with the men in the temper they were in, it seemed an even chance if we should see the lad again.
we ran on deck.
the pitch was bubbling in the seams; the nasty stench of the place turned me sick; if ever a man smelt fever and dysentery, it was in that abominable anchorage.
the six scoundrels were sitting grumbling under a sail in the forecastle; ashore we could see the gigs made fast and a man sitting in each, hard by where the river runs in.
one of them was whistling "lillibullero."
waiting was a strain, and it was decided that hunter and i should go ashore with the jolly-boat in quest of information.
the gigs had leaned to their right, but hunter and i pulled straight in, in the direction of the stockade upon the chart.
the two who were left guarding their boats seemed in a bustle at our appearance; "lillibullero" stopped off, and i could see the pair discussing what they ought to do.
had they gone and told silver, all might have turned out differently; but they had their orders, i suppose, and decided to sit quietly where they were and hark back again to "lillibullero."
there was a slight bend in the coast, and i steered so as to put it between us; even before we landed we had thus lost sight of the gigs.
i jumped out and came as near running as i durst, with a big silk handkerchief under my hat for coolness" sake and a brace of pistols ready primed for safety.
i had not gone a hundred yards when i reached the stockade.
this was how it was: a spring of clear water rose almost at the top of a knoll.
well, on the knoll, and enclosing the spring, they had clapped a stout loghouse fit to hold two score of people on a pinch and loopholed for musketry on either side.
all round this they had cleared a wide space, and then the thing was completed by a paling six feet high, without door or opening, too strong to pull down without time and labour and too open to shelter the besiegers.
the people in the log-house had them in every way; they stood quiet in shelter and shot the others like partridges.
all they wanted was a good watch and food; for, short of a complete surprise, they might have held the place against a regiment.
what particularly took my fancy was the spring.
for though we had a good enough place of it in the cabin of the hispaniola, with plenty of arms and ammunition, and things to eat, and excellent wines, there had been one thing overlooked -- we had no water.
i was thinking this over when there came ringing over the island the cry of a man at the point of death.
i was not new to violent death -- i have served his royal highness the duke of cumberland, and got a wound myself at fontenoy -- but i know my pulse went dot and carry one.
""jim hawkins is gone," was my first thought.
it is something to have been an old soldier, but more still to have been a doctor.
there is no time to dilly-dally in our work.
and so now i made up my mind instantly, and with no time lost returned to the shore and jumped on board the jolly-boat.
by good fortune hunter pulled a good oar.
we made the water fly, and the boat was soon alongside and i aboard the schooner.
i found them all shaken, as was natural.
the squire was sitting down, as white as a sheet, thinking of the harm he had led us to, the good soul!
and one of the six forecastle hands was little better.
""there's a man," says captain smollett, nodding towards him, "new to this work.
he came nigh-hand fainting, doctor, when he heard the cry.
another touch of the rudder and that man would join us."
i told my plan to the captain, and between us we settled on the details of its accomplishment.
we put old redruth in the gallery between the cabin and the forecastle, with three or four loaded muskets and a mattress for protection.
hunter brought the boat round under the stern-port, and joyce and i set to work loading her with powder tins, muskets, bags of biscuits, kegs of pork, a cask of cognac, and my invaluable medicine chest.
in the meantime, the squire and the captain stayed on deck, and the latter hailed the coxswain, who was the principal man aboard.
""mr. hands," he said, "here are two of us with a brace of pistols each.
if any one of you six make a signal of any description, that man's dead."
they were a good deal taken aback, and after a little consultation one and all tumbled down the fore companion, thinking no doubt to take us on the rear.
but when they saw redruth waiting for them in the sparred galley, they went about ship at once, and a head popped out again on deck.
""down, dog!"
cries the captain.
and the head popped back again; and we heard no more, for the time, of these six very faint-hearted seamen.
by this time, tumbling things in as they came, we had the jolly-boat loaded as much as we dared.
joyce and i got out through the stern-port, and we made for shore again as fast as oars could take us.
this second trip fairly aroused the watchers along shore.
""lillibullero" was dropped again; and just before we lost sight of them behind the little point, one of them whipped ashore and disappeared.
i had half a mind to change my plan and destroy their boats, but i feared that silver and the others might be close at hand, and all might very well be lost by trying for too much.
we had soon touched land in the same place as before and set to provision the block house.
all three made the first journey, heavily laden, and tossed our stores over the palisade.
then, leaving joyce to guard them -- one man, to be sure, but with half a dozen muskets -- hunter and i returned to the jolly-boat and loaded ourselves once more.
so we proceeded without pausing to take breath, till the whole cargo was bestowed, when the two servants took up their position in the block house, and i, with all my power, sculled back to the hispaniola.
that we should have risked a second boat load seems more daring than it really was.
they had the advantage of numbers, of course, but we had the advantage of arms.
not one of the men ashore had a musket, and before they could get within range for pistol shooting, we flattered ourselves we should be able to give a good account of a half-dozen at least.
the squire was waiting for me at the stern window, all his faintness gone from him.
he caught the painter and made it fast, and we fell to loading the boat for our very lives.
pork, powder, and biscuit was the cargo, with only a musket and a cutlass apiece for the squire and me and redruth and the captain.
the rest of the arms and powder we dropped overboard in two fathoms and a half of water, so that we could see the bright steel shining far below us in the sun, on the clean, sandy bottom.
by this time the tide was beginning to ebb, and the ship was swinging round to her anchor.
voices were heard faintly halloaing in the direction of the two gigs; and though this reassured us for joyce and hunter, who were well to the eastward, it warned our party to be off.
redruth retreated from his place in the gallery and dropped into the boat, which we then brought round to the ship's counter, to be handier for captain smollett.
""now, men," said he, "do you hear me?"
there was no answer from the forecastle.
""it's to you, abraham gray -- it's to you i am speaking."
still no reply.
""gray," resumed mr. smollett, a little louder, "i am leaving this ship, and i order you to follow your captain.
i know you are a good man at bottom, and i dare say not one of the lot of you's as bad as he makes out.
i have my watch here in my hand; i give you thirty seconds to join me in."
there was a pause.
""come, my fine fellow," continued the captain; "do n't hang so long in stays.
i'm risking my life and the lives of these good gentlemen every second."
there was a sudden scuffle, a sound of blows, and out burst abraham gray with a knife cut on the side of the cheek, and came running to the captain like a dog to the whistle.
""i'm with you, sir," said he.
and the next moment he and the captain had dropped aboard of us, and we had shoved off and given way.
we were clear out of the ship, but not yet ashore in our stockade.
17 narrative continued by the doctor: the jolly-boat's last trip this fifth trip was quite different from any of the others.
in the first place, the little gallipot of a boat that we were in was gravely overloaded.
five grown men, and three of them -- trelawney, redruth, and the captain -- over six feet high, was already more than she was meant to carry.
add to that the powder, pork, and bread-bags.
the gunwale was lipping astern.
several times we shipped a little water, and my breeches and the tails of my coat were all soaking wet before we had gone a hundred yards.
the captain made us trim the boat, and we got her to lie a little more evenly.
all the same, we were afraid to breathe.
in the second place, the ebb was now making -- a strong rippling current running westward through the basin, and then south "ard and seaward down the straits by which we had entered in the morning.
even the ripples were a danger to our overloaded craft, but the worst of it was that we were swept out of our true course and away from our proper landing-place behind the point.
if we let the current have its way we should come ashore beside the gigs, where the pirates might appear at any moment.
""i can not keep her head for the stockade, sir," said i to the captain.
i was steering, while he and redruth, two fresh men, were at the oars.
""the tide keeps washing her down.
could you pull a little stronger?"
""not without swamping the boat," said he.
""you must bear up, sir, if you please -- bear up until you see you're gaining."
i tried and found by experiment that the tide kept sweeping us westward until i had laid her head due east, or just about right angles to the way we ought to go.
""we'll never get ashore at this rate," said i. "if it's the only course that we can lie, sir, we must even lie it," returned the captain.
""we must keep upstream.
you see, sir," he went on, "if once we dropped to leeward of the landing-place, it's hard to say where we should get ashore, besides the chance of being boarded by the gigs; whereas, the way we go the current must slacken, and then we can dodge back along the shore."
""the current's less a "ready, sir," said the man gray, who was sitting in the fore-sheets; "you can ease her off a bit."
""thank you, my man," said i, quite as if nothing had happened, for we had all quietly made up our minds to treat him like one of ourselves.
suddenly the captain spoke up again, and i thought his voice was a little changed.
""the gun!"
said he.
""i have thought of that," said i, for i made sure he was thinking of a bombardment of the fort.
""they could never get the gun ashore, and if they did, they could never haul it through the woods."
""look astern, doctor," replied the captain.
we had entirely forgotten the long nine; and there, to our horror, were the five rogues busy about her, getting off her jacket, as they called the stout tarpaulin cover under which she sailed.
not only that, but it flashed into my mind at the same moment that the round-shot and the powder for the gun had been left behind, and a stroke with an axe would put it all into the possession of the evil ones abroad.
""israel was flint's gunner," said gray hoarsely.
at any risk, we put the boat's head direct for the landing-place.
by this time we had got so far out of the run of the current that we kept steerage way even at our necessarily gentle rate of rowing, and i could keep her steady for the goal.
but the worst of it was that with the course i now held we turned our broadside instead of our stern to the hispaniola and offered a target like a barn door.
i could hear as well as see that brandy-faced rascal israel hands plumping down a round-shot on the deck.
""who's the best shot?"
asked the captain.
""mr. trelawney, out and away," said i. "mr. trelawney, will you please pick me off one of these men, sir?
hands, if possible," said the captain.
trelawney was as cool as steel.
he looked to the priming of his gun.
""now," cried the captain, "easy with that gun, sir, or you'll swamp the boat.
all hands stand by to trim her when he aims."
the squire raised his gun, the rowing ceased, and we leaned over to the other side to keep the balance, and all was so nicely contrived that we did not ship a drop.
they had the gun, by this time, slewed round upon the swivel, and hands, who was at the muzzle with the rammer, was in consequence the most exposed.
however, we had no luck, for just as trelawney fired, down he stooped, the ball whistled over him, and it was one of the other four who fell.
the cry he gave was echoed not only by his companions on board but by a great number of voices from the shore, and looking in that direction i saw the other pirates trooping out from among the trees and tumbling into their places in the boats.
""here come the gigs, sir," said i. "give way, then," cried the captain.
""we must n't mind if we swamp her now.
if we ca n't get ashore, all's up."
""only one of the gigs is being manned, sir," i added; "the crew of the other most likely going round by shore to cut us off."
""they'll have a hot run, sir," returned the captain.
""jack ashore, you know.
it's not them i mind; it's the round-shot.
carpet bowls!
my lady's maid could n't miss.
tell us, squire, when you see the match, and we'll hold water."
in the meanwhile we had been making headway at a good pace for a boat so overloaded, and we had shipped but little water in the process.
we were now close in; thirty or forty strokes and we should beach her, for the ebb had already disclosed a narrow belt of sand below the clustering trees.
the gig was no longer to be feared; the little point had already concealed it from our eyes.
the ebb-tide, which had so cruelly delayed us, was now making reparation and delaying our assailants.
the one source of danger was the gun.
""if i durst," said the captain, "i'd stop and pick off another man."
but it was plain that they meant nothing should delay their shot.
they had never so much as looked at their fallen comrade, though he was not dead, and i could see him trying to crawl away.
""ready!"
cried the squire.
""hold!"
cried the captain, quick as an echo.
and he and redruth backed with a great heave that sent her stern bodily under water.
the report fell in at the same instant of time.
this was the first that jim heard, the sound of the squire's shot not having reached him.
where the ball passed, not one of us precisely knew, but i fancy it must have been over our heads and that the wind of it may have contributed to our disaster.
at any rate, the boat sank by the stern, quite gently, in three feet of water, leaving the captain and myself, facing each other, on our feet.
the other three took complete headers, and came up again drenched and bubbling.
so far there was no great harm.
no lives were lost, and we could wade ashore in safety.
but there were all our stores at the bottom, and to make things worse, only two guns out of five remained in a state for service.
mine i had snatched from my knees and held over my head, by a sort of instinct.
as for the captain, he had carried his over his shoulder by a bandoleer, and like a wise man, lock uppermost.
the other three had gone down with the boat.
to add to our concern, we heard voices already drawing near us in the woods along shore, and we had not only the danger of being cut off from the stockade in our half-crippled state but the fear before us whether, if hunter and joyce were attacked by half a dozen, they would have the sense and conduct to stand firm.
hunter was steady, that we knew; joyce was a doubtful case -- a pleasant, polite man for a valet and to brush one's clothes, but not entirely fitted for a man of war.
with all this in our minds, we waded ashore as fast as we could, leaving behind us the poor jolly-boat and a good half of all our powder and provisions.
18 narrative continued by the doctor: end of the first day's fighting we made our best speed across the strip of wood that now divided us from the stockade, and at every step we took the voices of the buccaneers rang nearer.
soon we could hear their footfalls as they ran and the cracking of the branches as they breasted across a bit of thicket.
i began to see we should have a brush for it in earnest and looked to my priming.
""captain," said i, "trelawney is the dead shot.
give him your gun; his own is useless."
they exchanged guns, and trelawney, silent and cool as he had been since the beginning of the bustle, hung a moment on his heel to see that all was fit for service.
at the same time, observing gray to be unarmed, i handed him my cutlass.
it did all our hearts good to see him spit in his hand, knit his brows, and make the blade sing through the air.
it was plain from every line of his body that our new hand was worth his salt.
forty paces farther we came to the edge of the wood and saw the stockade in front of us.
we struck the enclosure about the middle of the south side, and almost at the same time, seven mutineers -- job anderson, the boatswain, at their head -- appeared in full cry at the southwestern corner.
they paused as if taken aback, and before they recovered, not only the squire and i, but hunter and joyce from the block house, had time to fire.
the four shots came in rather a scattering volley, but they did the business: one of the enemy actually fell, and the rest, without hesitation, turned and plunged into the trees.
after reloading, we walked down the outside of the palisade to see to the fallen enemy.
he was stone dead -- shot through the heart.
we began to rejoice over our good success when just at that moment a pistol cracked in the bush, a ball whistled close past my ear, and poor tom redruth stumbled and fell his length on the ground.
both the squire and i returned the shot, but as we had nothing to aim at, it is probable we only wasted powder.
then we reloaded and turned our attention to poor tom.
the captain and gray were already examining him, and i saw with half an eye that all was over.
i believe the readiness of our return volley had scattered the mutineers once more, for we were suffered without further molestation to get the poor old gamekeeper hoisted over the stockade and carried, groaning and bleeding, into the log-house.
poor old fellow, he had not uttered one word of surprise, complaint, fear, or even acquiescence from the very beginning of our troubles till now, when we had laid him down in the log-house to die.
he had lain like a trojan behind his mattress in the gallery; he had followed every order silently, doggedly, and well; he was the oldest of our party by a score of years; and now, sullen, old, serviceable servant, it was he that was to die.
the squire dropped down beside him on his knees and kissed his hand, crying like a child.
""be i going, doctor?"
he asked.
""tom, my man," said i, "you're going home."
""i wish i had had a lick at them with the gun first," he replied.
""tom," said the squire, "say you forgive me, wo n't you?"
""would that be respectful like, from me to you, squire?"
was the answer.
""howsoever, so be it, amen!"
after a little while of silence, he said he thought somebody might read a prayer.
""it's the custom, sir," he added apologetically.
and not long after, without another word, he passed away.
in the meantime the captain, whom i had observed to be wonderfully swollen about the chest and pockets, had turned out a great many various stores -- the british colours, a bible, a coil of stoutish rope, pen, ink, the log-book, and pounds of tobacco.
he had found a longish fir-tree lying felled and trimmed in the enclosure, and with the help of hunter he had set it up at the corner of the log-house where the trunks crossed and made an angle.
then, climbing on the roof, he had with his own hand bent and run up the colours.
this seemed mightily to relieve him.
he re-entered the log-house and set about counting up the stores as if nothing else existed.
but he had an eye on tom's passage for all that, and as soon as all was over, came forward with another flag and reverently spread it on the body.
""do n't you take on, sir," he said, shaking the squire's hand.
""all's well with him; no fear for a hand that's been shot down in his duty to captain and owner.
it may n't be good divinity, but it's a fact."
then he pulled me aside.
""dr. livesey," he said, "in how many weeks do you and squire expect the consort?"
i told him it was a question not of weeks but of months, that if we were not back by the end of august blandly was to send to find us, but neither sooner nor later.
""you can calculate for yourself," i said.
""why, yes," returned the captain, scratching his head; "and making a large allowance, sir, for all the gifts of providence, i should say we were pretty close hauled."
""how do you mean?"
i asked.
""it's a pity, sir, we lost that second load.
that's what i mean," replied the captain.
""as for powder and shot, we'll do.
but the rations are short, very short -- so short, dr. livesey, that we're perhaps as well without that extra mouth."
and he pointed to the dead body under the flag.
just then, with a roar and a whistle, a round-shot passed high above the roof of the log-house and plumped far beyond us in the wood.
""oho!"
said the captain.
""blaze away!
you've little enough powder already, my lads."
at the second trial, the aim was better, and the ball descended inside the stockade, scattering a cloud of sand but doing no further damage.
""captain," said the squire, "the house is quite invisible from the ship.
it must be the flag they are aiming at.
would it not be wiser to take it in?"
""strike my colours!"
cried the captain.
""no, sir, not i"; and as soon as he had said the words, i think we all agreed with him.
for it was not only a piece of stout, seamanly, good feeling; it was good policy besides and showed our enemies that we despised their cannonade.
all through the evening they kept thundering away.
ball after ball flew over or fell short or kicked up the sand in the enclosure, but they had to fire so high that the shot fell dead and buried itself in the soft sand.
we had no ricochet to fear, and though one popped in through the roof of the log-house and out again through the floor, we soon got used to that sort of horse-play and minded it no more than cricket.
""there is one good thing about all this," observed the captain; "the wood in front of us is likely clear.
the ebb has made a good while; our stores should be uncovered.
volunteers to go and bring in pork."
gray and hunter were the first to come forward.
well armed, they stole out of the stockade, but it proved a useless mission.
the mutineers were bolder than we fancied or they put more trust in israel's gunnery.
for four or five of them were busy carrying off our stores and wading out with them to one of the gigs that lay close by, pulling an oar or so to hold her steady against the current.
silver was in the stern-sheets in command; and every man of them was now provided with a musket from some secret magazine of their own.
the captain sat down to his log, and here is the beginning of the entry: alexander smollett, master; david livesey, ship's doctor; abraham gray, carpenter's mate; john trelawney, owner; john hunter and richard joyce, owner's servants, landsmen -- being all that is left faithful of the ship's company -- with stores for ten days at short rations, came ashore this day and flew british colours on the log-house in treasure island.
thomas redruth, owner's servant, landsman, shot by the mutineers; james hawkins, cabin-boy -- and at the same time, i was wondering over poor jim hawkins" fate.
a hail on the land side.
""somebody hailing us," said hunter, who was on guard.
""doctor!
squire!
captain!
hullo, hunter, is that you?"
came the cries.
and i ran to the door in time to see jim hawkins, safe and sound, come climbing over the stockade.
19 narrative resumed by jim hawkins: the garrison in the stockade as soon as ben gunn saw the colours he came to a halt, stopped me by the arm, and sat down.
""now," said he, "there's your friends, sure enough."
""far more likely it's the mutineers," i answered.
""that!"
he cried.
""why, in a place like this, where nobody puts in but gen "lemen of fortune, silver would fly the jolly roger, you do n't make no doubt of that.
no, that's your friends.
there's been blows too, and i reckon your friends has had the best of it; and here they are ashore in the old stockade, as was made years and years ago by flint.
ah, he was the man to have a headpiece, was flint!
barring rum, his match were never seen.
he were afraid of none, not he; on" y silver -- silver was that genteel."
""well," said i, "that may be so, and so be it; all the more reason that i should hurry on and join my friends."
""nay, mate," returned ben, "not you.
you're a good boy, or i'm mistook; but you're on" y a boy, all told.
now, ben gunn is fly.
rum would n't bring me there, where you're going -- not rum would n't, till i see your born gen "leman and gets it on his word of honour.
and you wo n't forget my words;" a precious sight -lrb- that's what you'll say -rrb-, a precious sight more confidence" -- and then nips him."
and he pinched me the third time with the same air of cleverness.
""and when ben gunn is wanted, you know where to find him, jim.
just wheer you found him today.
and him that comes is to have a white thing in his hand, and he's to come alone.
oh!
and you'll say this: "ben gunn," says you, "has reasons of his own.""
""well," said i, "i believe i understand.
you have something to propose, and you wish to see the squire or the doctor, and you're to be found where i found you.
is that all?"
""and when?
says you," he added.
""why, from about noon observation to about six bells."
""good," said i, "and now may i go?"
""you wo n't forget?"
he inquired anxiously.
""precious sight, and reasons of his own, says you.
reasons of his own; that's the mainstay; as between man and man.
well, then" -- still holding me -- "i reckon you can go, jim.
and, jim, if you was to see silver, you would n't go for to sell ben gunn?
wild horses would n't draw it from you?
no, says you.
and if them pirates camp ashore, jim, what would you say but there'd be widders in the morning?"
here he was interrupted by a loud report, and a cannonball came tearing through the trees and pitched in the sand not a hundred yards from where we two were talking.
the next moment each of us had taken to his heels in a different direction.
for a good hour to come frequent reports shook the island, and balls kept crashing through the woods.
i moved from hiding-place to hiding-place, always pursued, or so it seemed to me, by these terrifying missiles.
but towards the end of the bombardment, though still i durst not venture in the direction of the stockade, where the balls fell oftenest, i had begun, in a manner, to pluck up my heart again, and after a long detour to the east, crept down among the shore-side trees.
the sun had just set, the sea breeze was rustling and tumbling in the woods and ruffling the grey surface of the anchorage; the tide, too, was far out, and great tracts of sand lay uncovered; the air, after the heat of the day, chilled me through my jacket.
the hispaniola still lay where she had anchored; but, sure enough, there was the jolly roger -- the black flag of piracy -- flying from her peak.
even as i looked, there came another red flash and another report that sent the echoes clattering, and one more round-shot whistled through the air.
it was the last of the cannonade.
i lay for some time watching the bustle which succeeded the attack.
men were demolishing something with axes on the beach near the stockade -- the poor jolly-boat, i afterwards discovered.
away, near the mouth of the river, a great fire was glowing among the trees, and between that point and the ship one of the gigs kept coming and going, the men, whom i had seen so gloomy, shouting at the oars like children.
but there was a sound in their voices which suggested rum.
at length i thought i might return towards the stockade.
i was pretty far down on the low, sandy spit that encloses the anchorage to the east, and is joined at half-water to skeleton island; and now, as i rose to my feet, i saw, some distance further down the spit and rising from among low bushes, an isolated rock, pretty high, and peculiarly white in colour.
it occurred to me that this might be the white rock of which ben gunn had spoken and that some day or other a boat might be wanted and i should know where to look for one.
then i skirted among the woods until i had regained the rear, or shoreward side, of the stockade, and was soon warmly welcomed by the faithful party.
i had soon told my story and began to look about me.
the log-house was made of unsquared trunks of pine -- roof, walls, and floor.
the latter stood in several places as much as a foot or a foot and a half above the surface of the sand.
there was a porch at the door, and under this porch the little spring welled up into an artificial basin of a rather odd kind -- no other than a great ship's kettle of iron, with the bottom knocked out, and sunk "to her bearings," as the captain said, among the sand.
little had been left besides the framework of the house, but in one corner there was a stone slab laid down by way of hearth and an old rusty iron basket to contain the fire.
the slopes of the knoll and all the inside of the stockade had been cleared of timber to build the house, and we could see by the stumps what a fine and lofty grove had been destroyed.
most of the soil had been washed away or buried in drift after the removal of the trees; only where the streamlet ran down from the kettle a thick bed of moss and some ferns and little creeping bushes were still green among the sand.
very close around the stockade -- too close for defence, they said -- the wood still flourished high and dense, all of fir on the land side, but towards the sea with a large admixture of live-oaks.
the cold evening breeze, of which i have spoken, whistled through every chink of the rude building and sprinkled the floor with a continual rain of fine sand.
there was sand in our eyes, sand in our teeth, sand in our suppers, sand dancing in the spring at the bottom of the kettle, for all the world like porridge beginning to boil.
our chimney was a square hole in the roof; it was but a little part of the smoke that found its way out, and the rest eddied about the house and kept us coughing and piping the eye.
add to this that gray, the new man, had his face tied up in a bandage for a cut he had got in breaking away from the mutineers and that poor old tom redruth, still unburied, lay along the wall, stiff and stark, under the union jack.
if we had been allowed to sit idle, we should all have fallen in the blues, but captain smollett was never the man for that.
all hands were called up before him, and he divided us into watches.
the doctor and gray and i for one; the squire, hunter, and joyce upon the other.
tired though we all were, two were sent out for firewood; two more were set to dig a grave for redruth; the doctor was named cook; i was put sentry at the door; and the captain himself went from one to another, keeping up our spirits and lending a hand wherever it was wanted.
from time to time the doctor came to the door for a little air and to rest his eyes, which were almost smoked out of his head, and whenever he did so, he had a word for me.
""that man smollett," he said once, "is a better man than i am.
and when i say that it means a deal, jim."
another time he came and was silent for a while.
then he put his head on one side, and looked at me.
""is this ben gunn a man?"
he asked.
""i do not know, sir," said i. "i am not very sure whether he's sane."
""if there's any doubt about the matter, he is," returned the doctor.
""a man who has been three years biting his nails on a desert island, jim, ca n't expect to appear as sane as you or me.
it does n't lie in human nature.
was it cheese you said he had a fancy for?"
""yes, sir, cheese," i answered.
""well, jim," says he, "just see the good that comes of being dainty in your food.
you've seen my snuff-box, have n't you?
and you never saw me take snuff, the reason being that in my snuff-box i carry a piece of parmesan cheese -- a cheese made in italy, very nutritious.
well, that's for ben gunn!"
before supper was eaten we buried old tom in the sand and stood round him for a while bare-headed in the breeze.
a good deal of firewood had been got in, but not enough for the captain's fancy, and he shook his head over it and told us we "must get back to this tomorrow rather livelier."
then, when we had eaten our pork and each had a good stiff glass of brandy grog, the three chiefs got together in a corner to discuss our prospects.
it appears they were at their wits" end what to do, the stores being so low that we must have been starved into surrender long before help came.
but our best hope, it was decided, was to kill off the buccaneers until they either hauled down their flag or ran away with the hispaniola.
from nineteen they were already reduced to fifteen, two others were wounded, and one at least -- the man shot beside the gun -- severely wounded, if he were not dead.
every time we had a crack at them, we were to take it, saving our own lives, with the extremest care.
and besides that, we had two able allies -- rum and the climate.
as for the first, though we were about half a mile away, we could hear them roaring and singing late into the night; and as for the second, the doctor staked his wig that, camped where they were in the marsh and unprovided with remedies, the half of them would be on their backs before a week.
""so," he added, "if we are not all shot down first they'll be glad to be packing in the schooner.
it's always a ship, and they can get to buccaneering again, i suppose."
""first ship that ever i lost," said captain smollett.
i was dead tired, as you may fancy; and when i got to sleep, which was not till after a great deal of tossing, i slept like a log of wood.
the rest had long been up and had already breakfasted and increased the pile of firewood by about half as much again when i was wakened by a bustle and the sound of voices.
""flag of truce!"
i heard someone say; and then, immediately after, with a cry of surprise, "silver himself!"
and at that, up i jumped, and rubbing my eyes, ran to a loophole in the wall.
20 silver's embassy sure enough, there were two men just outside the stockade, one of them waving a white cloth, the other, no less a person than silver himself, standing placidly by.
it was still quite early, and the coldest morning that i think i ever was abroad in -- a chill that pierced into the marrow.
the sky was bright and cloudless overhead, and the tops of the trees shone rosily in the sun.
but where silver stood with his lieutenant, all was still in shadow, and they waded knee-deep in a low white vapour that had crawled during the night out of the morass.
the chill and the vapour taken together told a poor tale of the island.
it was plainly a damp, feverish, unhealthy spot.
""keep indoors, men," said the captain.
""ten to one this is a trick."
then he hailed the buccaneer.
""who goes?
stand, or we fire."
""flag of truce," cried silver.
the captain was in the porch, keeping himself carefully out of the way of a treacherous shot, should any be intended.
he turned and spoke to us, "doctor's watch on the lookout.
dr. livesey take the north side, if you please; jim, the east; gray, west.
the watch below, all hands to load muskets.
lively, men, and careful."
and then he turned again to the mutineers.
""and what do you want with your flag of truce?"
he cried.
this time it was the other man who replied.
""cap'n silver, sir, to come on board and make terms," he shouted.
""cap'n silver!
do n't know him.
who's he?"
cried the captain.
and we could hear him adding to himself, "cap'n, is it?
my heart, and here's promotion!"
long john answered for himself.
""me, sir.
these poor lads have chosen me cap'n, after your desertion, sir" -- laying a particular emphasis upon the word "desertion."
""we're willing to submit, if we can come to terms, and no bones about it.
all i ask is your word, cap'n smollett, to let me safe and sound out of this here stockade, and one minute to get out o" shot before a gun is fired."
""my man," said captain smollett, "i have not the slightest desire to talk to you.
if you wish to talk to me, you can come, that's all.
if there's any treachery, it'll be on your side, and the lord help you."
""that's enough, cap'n," shouted long john cheerily.
""a word from you's enough.
i know a gentleman, and you may lay to that."
we could see the man who carried the flag of truce attempting to hold silver back.
nor was that wonderful, seeing how cavalier had been the captain's answer.
but silver laughed at him aloud and slapped him on the back as if the idea of alarm had been absurd.
then he advanced to the stockade, threw over his crutch, got a leg up, and with great vigour and skill succeeded in surmounting the fence and dropping safely to the other side.
i will confess that i was far too much taken up with what was going on to be of the slightest use as sentry; indeed, i had already deserted my eastern loophole and crept up behind the captain, who had now seated himself on the threshold, with his elbows on his knees, his head in his hands, and his eyes fixed on the water as it bubbled out of the old iron kettle in the sand.
he was whistling "come, lasses and lads."
silver had terrible hard work getting up the knoll.
what with the steepness of the incline, the thick tree stumps, and the soft sand, he and his crutch were as helpless as a ship in stays.
but he stuck to it like a man in silence, and at last arrived before the captain, whom he saluted in the handsomest style.
he was tricked out in his best; an immense blue coat, thick with brass buttons, hung as low as to his knees, and a fine laced hat was set on the back of his head.
""here you are, my man," said the captain, raising his head.
""you had better sit down."
""you ai n't a-going to let me inside, cap'n?"
complained long john.
""it's a main cold morning, to be sure, sir, to sit outside upon the sand."
""why, silver," said the captain, "if you had pleased to be an honest man, you might have been sitting in your galley.
it's your own doing.
you're either my ship's cook -- and then you were treated handsome -- or cap'n silver, a common mutineer and pirate, and then you can go hang!"
""well, well, cap'n," returned the sea-cook, sitting down as he was bidden on the sand, "you'll have to give me a hand up again, that's all.
a sweet pretty place you have of it here.
ah, there's jim!
the top of the morning to you, jim.
doctor, here's my service.
why, there you all are together like a happy family, in a manner of speaking."
""if you have anything to say, my man, better say it," said the captain.
""right you were, cap'n smollett," replied silver.
""dooty is dooty, to be sure.
well now, you look here, that was a good lay of yours last night.
i do n't deny it was a good lay.
some of you pretty handy with a handspike-end.
and i'll not deny neither but what some of my people was shook -- maybe all was shook; maybe i was shook myself; maybe that's why i'm here for terms.
but you mark me, cap'n, it wo n't do twice, by thunder!
we'll have to do sentry-go and ease off a point or so on the rum.
maybe you think we were all a sheet in the wind's eye.
but i'll tell you i was sober; i was on" y dog tired; and if i'd awoke a second sooner, i'd" a caught you at the act, i would.
he was n't dead when i got round to him, not he."
""well?"
says captain smollett as cool as can be.
all that silver said was a riddle to him, but you would never have guessed it from his tone.
as for me, i began to have an inkling.
ben gunn's last words came back to my mind.
i began to suppose that he had paid the buccaneers a visit while they all lay drunk together round their fire, and i reckoned up with glee that we had only fourteen enemies to deal with.
""well, here it is," said silver.
""we want that treasure, and we'll have it -- that's our point!
you would just as soon save your lives, i reckon; and that's yours.
you have a chart, have n't you?"
""that's as may be," replied the captain.
""oh, well, you have, i know that," returned long john.
""you need n't be so husky with a man; there ai n't a particle of service in that, and you may lay to it.
what i mean is, we want your chart.
now, i never meant you no harm, myself."
""that wo n't do with me, my man," interrupted the captain.
""we know exactly what you meant to do, and we do n't care, for now, you see, you ca n't do it."
and the captain looked at him calmly and proceeded to fill a pipe.
""if abe gray --" silver broke out.
""avast there!"
cried mr. smollett.
""gray told me nothing, and i asked him nothing; and what's more, i would see you and him and this whole island blown clean out of the water into blazes first.
so there's my mind for you, my man, on that."
this little whiff of temper seemed to cool silver down.
he had been growing nettled before, but now he pulled himself together.
""like enough," said he.
""i would set no limits to what gentlemen might consider shipshape, or might not, as the case were.
and seein" as how you are about to take a pipe, cap'n, i'll make so free as do likewise."
and he filled a pipe and lighted it; and the two men sat silently smoking for quite a while, now looking each other in the face, now stopping their tobacco, now leaning forward to spit.
it was as good as the play to see them.
""now," resumed silver, "here it is.
you give us the chart to get the treasure by, and drop shooting poor seamen and stoving of their heads in while asleep.
you do that, and we'll offer you a choice.
either you come aboard along of us, once the treasure shipped, and then i'll give you my affy-davy, upon my word of honour, to clap you somewhere safe ashore.
or if that ai n't to your fancy, some of my hands being rough and having old scores on account of hazing, then you can stay here, you can.
we'll divide stores with you, man for man; and i'll give my affy-davy, as before to speak the first ship i sight, and send'em here to pick you up.
now, you'll own that's talking.
handsomer you could n't look to get, now you.
and i hope" -- raising his voice -- "that all hands in this here block house will overhaul my words, for what is spoke to one is spoke to all."
captain smollett rose from his seat and knocked out the ashes of his pipe in the palm of his left hand.
""is that all?"
he asked.
""every last word, by thunder!"
answered john.
""refuse that, and you've seen the last of me but musket-balls."
""very good," said the captain.
""now you'll hear me.
if you'll come up one by one, unarmed, i'll engage to clap you all in irons and take you home to a fair trial in england.
if you wo n't, my name is alexander smollett, i've flown my sovereign's colours, and i'll see you all to davy jones.
you ca n't find the treasure.
you ca n't sail the ship -- there's not a man among you fit to sail the ship.
you ca n't fight us -- gray, there, got away from five of you.
your ship's in irons, master silver; you're on a lee shore, and so you'll find.
i stand here and tell you so; and they're the last good words you'll get from me, for in the name of heaven, i'll put a bullet in your back when next i meet you.
tramp, my lad.
bundle out of this, please, hand over hand, and double quick."
silver's face was a picture; his eyes started in his head with wrath.
he shook the fire out of his pipe.
""give me a hand up!"
he cried.
""not i," returned the captain.
""who'll give me a hand up?"
he roared.
not a man among us moved.
growling the foulest imprecations, he crawled along the sand till he got hold of the porch and could hoist himself again upon his crutch.
then he spat into the spring.
""there!"
he cried.
""that's what i think of ye.
before an hour's out, i'll stove in your old block house like a rum puncheon.
laugh, by thunder, laugh!
before an hour's out, ye'll laugh upon the other side.
them that die'll be the lucky ones."
and with a dreadful oath he stumbled off, ploughed down the sand, was helped across the stockade, after four or five failures, by the man with the flag of truce, and disappeared in an instant afterwards among the trees.
21 the attack as soon as silver disappeared, the captain, who had been closely watching him, turned towards the interior of the house and found not a man of us at his post but gray.
it was the first time we had ever seen him angry.
""quarters!"
he roared.
and then, as we all slunk back to our places, "gray," he said, "i'll put your name in the log; you've stood by your duty like a seaman.
mr. trelawney, i'm surprised at you, sir.
doctor, i thought you had worn the king's coat!
if that was how you served at fontenoy, sir, you'd have been better in your berth."
the doctor's watch were all back at their loopholes, the rest were busy loading the spare muskets, and everyone with a red face, you may be certain, and a flea in his ear, as the saying is.
the captain looked on for a while in silence.
then he spoke.
""my lads," said he, "i've given silver a broadside.
i pitched it in red-hot on purpose; and before the hour's out, as he said, we shall be boarded.
we're outnumbered, i need n't tell you that, but we fight in shelter; and a minute ago i should have said we fought with discipline.
i've no manner of doubt that we can drub them, if you choose."
then he went the rounds and saw, as he said, that all was clear.
on the two short sides of the house, east and west, there were only two loopholes; on the south side where the porch was, two again; and on the north side, five.
there was a round score of muskets for the seven of us; the firewood had been built into four piles -- tables, you might say -- one about the middle of each side, and on each of these tables some ammunition and four loaded muskets were laid ready to the hand of the defenders.
in the middle, the cutlasses lay ranged.
""toss out the fire," said the captain; "the chill is past, and we must n't have smoke in our eyes."
the iron fire-basket was carried bodily out by mr. trelawney, and the embers smothered among sand.
""hawkins has n't had his breakfast.
hawkins, help yourself, and back to your post to eat it," continued captain smollett.
""lively, now, my lad; you'll want it before you've done.
hunter, serve out a round of brandy to all hands."
and while this was going on, the captain completed, in his own mind, the plan of the defence.
""doctor, you will take the door," he resumed.
""see, and do n't expose yourself; keep within, and fire through the porch.
hunter, take the east side, there.
joyce, you stand by the west, my man.
mr. trelawney, you are the best shot -- you and gray will take this long north side, with the five loopholes; it's there the danger is.
if they can get up to it and fire in upon us through our own ports, things would begin to look dirty.
hawkins, neither you nor i are much account at the shooting; we'll stand by to load and bear a hand."
as the captain had said, the chill was past.
as soon as the sun had climbed above our girdle of trees, it fell with all its force upon the clearing and drank up the vapours at a draught.
soon the sand was baking and the resin melting in the logs of the block house.
jackets and coats were flung aside, shirts thrown open at the neck and rolled up to the shoulders; and we stood there, each at his post, in a fever of heat and anxiety.
an hour passed away.
""hang them!"
said the captain.
""this is as dull as the doldrums.
gray, whistle for a wind."
and just at that moment came the first news of the attack.
""if you please, sir," said joyce, "if i see anyone, am i to fire?"
""i told you so!"
cried the captain.
""thank you, sir," returned joyce with the same quiet civility.
nothing followed for a time, but the remark had set us all on the alert, straining ears and eyes -- the musketeers with their pieces balanced in their hands, the captain out in the middle of the block house with his mouth very tight and a frown on his face.
so some seconds passed, till suddenly joyce whipped up his musket and fired.
the report had scarcely died away ere it was repeated and repeated from without in a scattering volley, shot behind shot, like a string of geese, from every side of the enclosure.
several bullets struck the log-house, but not one entered; and as the smoke cleared away and vanished, the stockade and the woods around it looked as quiet and empty as before.
not a bough waved, not the gleam of a musket-barrel betrayed the presence of our foes.
""did you hit your man?"
asked the captain.
""no, sir," replied joyce.
""i believe not, sir."
""next best thing to tell the truth," muttered captain smollett.
""load his gun, hawkins.
how many should say there were on your side, doctor?"
""i know precisely," said dr. livesey.
""three shots were fired on this side.
i saw the three flashes -- two close together -- one farther to the west."
""three!"
repeated the captain.
""and how many on yours, mr. trelawney?"
but this was not so easily answered.
there had come many from the north -- seven by the squire's computation, eight or nine according to gray.
from the east and west only a single shot had been fired.
it was plain, therefore, that the attack would be developed from the north and that on the other three sides we were only to be annoyed by a show of hostilities.
but captain smollett made no change in his arrangements.
if the mutineers succeeded in crossing the stockade, he argued, they would take possession of any unprotected loophole and shoot us down like rats in our own stronghold.
nor had we much time left to us for thought.
suddenly, with a loud huzza, a little cloud of pirates leaped from the woods on the north side and ran straight on the stockade.
at the same moment, the fire was once more opened from the woods, and a rifle ball sang through the doorway and knocked the doctor's musket into bits.
the boarders swarmed over the fence like monkeys.
squire and gray fired again and yet again; three men fell, one forwards into the enclosure, two back on the outside.
but of these, one was evidently more frightened than hurt, for he was on his feet again in a crack and instantly disappeared among the trees.
two had bit the dust, one had fled, four had made good their footing inside our defences, while from the shelter of the woods seven or eight men, each evidently supplied with several muskets, kept up a hot though useless fire on the log-house.
the four who had boarded made straight before them for the building, shouting as they ran, and the men among the trees shouted back to encourage them.
several shots were fired, but such was the hurry of the marksmen that not one appears to have taken effect.
in a moment, the four pirates had swarmed up the mound and were upon us.
the head of job anderson, the boatswain, appeared at the middle loophole.
""at'em, all hands -- all hands!"
he roared in a voice of thunder.
at the same moment, another pirate grasped hunter's musket by the muzzle, wrenched it from his hands, plucked it through the loophole, and with one stunning blow, laid the poor fellow senseless on the floor.
meanwhile a third, running unharmed all around the house, appeared suddenly in the doorway and fell with his cutlass on the doctor.
our position was utterly reversed.
a moment since we were firing, under cover, at an exposed enemy; now it was we who lay uncovered and could not return a blow.
the log-house was full of smoke, to which we owed our comparative safety.
cries and confusion, the flashes and reports of pistol-shots, and one loud groan rang in my ears.
""out, lads, out, and fight'em in the open!
cutlasses!"
cried the captain.
i snatched a cutlass from the pile, and someone, at the same time snatching another, gave me a cut across the knuckles which i hardly felt.
i dashed out of the door into the clear sunlight.
someone was close behind, i knew not whom.
right in front, the doctor was pursuing his assailant down the hill, and just as my eyes fell upon him, beat down his guard and sent him sprawling on his back with a great slash across the face.
""round the house, lads!
round the house!"
cried the captain; and even in the hurly-burly, i perceived a change in his voice.
mechanically, i obeyed, turned eastwards, and with my cutlass raised, ran round the corner of the house.
next moment i was face to face with anderson.
he roared aloud, and his hanger went up above his head, flashing in the sunlight.
i had not time to be afraid, but as the blow still hung impending, leaped in a trice upon one side, and missing my foot in the soft sand, rolled headlong down the slope.
when i had first sallied from the door, the other mutineers had been already swarming up the palisade to make an end of us.
one man, in a red night-cap, with his cutlass in his mouth, had even got upon the top and thrown a leg across.
well, so short had been the interval that when i found my feet again all was in the same posture, the fellow with the red night-cap still half-way over, another still just showing his head above the top of the stockade.
and yet, in this breath of time, the fight was over and the victory was ours.
gray, following close behind me, had cut down the big boatswain ere he had time to recover from his last blow.
another had been shot at a loophole in the very act of firing into the house and now lay in agony, the pistol still smoking in his hand.
a third, as i had seen, the doctor had disposed of at a blow.
of the four who had scaled the palisade, one only remained unaccounted for, and he, having left his cutlass on the field, was now clambering out again with the fear of death upon him.
""fire -- fire from the house!"
cried the doctor.
""and you, lads, back into cover."
but his words were unheeded, no shot was fired, and the last boarder made good his escape and disappeared with the rest into the wood.
in three seconds nothing remained of the attacking party but the five who had fallen, four on the inside and one on the outside of the palisade.
the doctor and gray and i ran full speed for shelter.
the survivors would soon be back where they had left their muskets, and at any moment the fire might recommence.
the house was by this time somewhat cleared of smoke, and we saw at a glance the price we had paid for victory.
hunter lay beside his loophole, stunned; joyce by his, shot through the head, never to move again; while right in the centre, the squire was supporting the captain, one as pale as the other.
""the captain's wounded," said mr. trelawney.
""have they run?"
asked mr. smollett.
""all that could, you may be bound," returned the doctor; "but there's five of them will never run again."
""five!"
cried the captain.
""come, that's better.
five against three leaves us four to nine.
that's better odds than we had at starting.
we were seven to nineteen then, or thought we were, and that's as bad to bear."
* * the mutineers were soon only eight in number, for the man shot by mr. trelawney on board the schooner died that same evening of his wound.
but this was, of course, not known till after by the faithful party.
part five -- my sea adventure 22 how my sea adventure began there was no return of the mutineers -- not so much as another shot out of the woods.
they had "got their rations for that day," as the captain put it, and we had the place to ourselves and a quiet time to overhaul the wounded and get dinner.
squire and i cooked outside in spite of the danger, and even outside we could hardly tell what we were at, for horror of the loud groans that reached us from the doctor's patients.
out of the eight men who had fallen in the action, only three still breathed -- that one of the pirates who had been shot at the loophole, hunter, and captain smollett; and of these, the first two were as good as dead; the mutineer indeed died under the doctor's knife, and hunter, do what we could, never recovered consciousness in this world.
he lingered all day, breathing loudly like the old buccaneer at home in his apoplectic fit, but the bones of his chest had been crushed by the blow and his skull fractured in falling, and some time in the following night, without sign or sound, he went to his maker.
as for the captain, his wounds were grievous indeed, but not dangerous.
no organ was fatally injured.
anderson's ball -- for it was job that shot him first -- had broken his shoulder-blade and touched the lung, not badly; the second had only torn and displaced some muscles in the calf.
he was sure to recover, the doctor said, but in the meantime, and for weeks to come, he must not walk nor move his arm, nor so much as speak when he could help it.
my own accidental cut across the knuckles was a flea-bite.
doctor livesey patched it up with plaster and pulled my ears for me into the bargain.
after dinner the squire and the doctor sat by the captain's side awhile in consultation; and when they had talked to their hearts" content, it being then a little past noon, the doctor took up his hat and pistols, girt on a cutlass, put the chart in his pocket, and with a musket over his shoulder crossed the palisade on the north side and set off briskly through the trees.
gray and i were sitting together at the far end of the block house, to be out of earshot of our officers consulting; and gray took his pipe out of his mouth and fairly forgot to put it back again, so thunder-struck he was at this occurrence.
""why, in the name of davy jones," said he, "is dr. livesey mad?"
""why no," says i. "he's about the last of this crew for that, i take it."
""well, shipmate," said gray, "mad he may not be; but if he's not, you mark my words, i am."
""i take it," replied i, "the doctor has his idea; and if i am right, he's going now to see ben gunn."
i was right, as appeared later; but in the meantime, the house being stifling hot and the little patch of sand inside the palisade ablaze with midday sun, i began to get another thought into my head, which was not by any means so right.
what i began to do was to envy the doctor walking in the cool shadow of the woods with the birds about him and the pleasant smell of the pines, while i sat grilling, with my clothes stuck to the hot resin, and so much blood about me and so many poor dead bodies lying all around that i took a disgust of the place that was almost as strong as fear.
all the time i was washing out the block house, and then washing up the things from dinner, this disgust and envy kept growing stronger and stronger, till at last, being near a bread-bag, and no one then observing me, i took the first step towards my escapade and filled both pockets of my coat with biscuit.
i was a fool, if you like, and certainly i was going to do a foolish, over-bold act; but i was determined to do it with all the precautions in my power.
these biscuits, should anything befall me, would keep me, at least, from starving till far on in the next day.
the next thing i laid hold of was a brace of pistols, and as i already had a powder-horn and bullets, i felt myself well supplied with arms.
as for the scheme i had in my head, it was not a bad one in itself.
i was to go down the sandy spit that divides the anchorage on the east from the open sea, find the white rock i had observed last evening, and ascertain whether it was there or not that ben gunn had hidden his boat, a thing quite worth doing, as i still believe.
but as i was certain i should not be allowed to leave the enclosure, my only plan was to take french leave and slip out when nobody was watching, and that was so bad a way of doing it as made the thing itself wrong.
but i was only a boy, and i had made my mind up.
well, as things at last fell out, i found an admirable opportunity.
the squire and gray were busy helping the captain with his bandages, the coast was clear, i made a bolt for it over the stockade and into the thickest of the trees, and before my absence was observed i was out of cry of my companions.
this was my second folly, far worse than the first, as i left but two sound men to guard the house; but like the first, it was a help towards saving all of us.
i took my way straight for the east coast of the island, for i was determined to go down the sea side of the spit to avoid all chance of observation from the anchorage.
it was already late in the afternoon, although still warm and sunny.
as i continued to thread the tall woods, i could hear from far before me not only the continuous thunder of the surf, but a certain tossing of foliage and grinding of boughs which showed me the sea breeze had set in higher than usual.
soon cool draughts of air began to reach me, and a few steps farther i came forth into the open borders of the grove, and saw the sea lying blue and sunny to the horizon and the surf tumbling and tossing its foam along the beach.
i have never seen the sea quiet round treasure island.
the sun might blaze overhead, the air be without a breath, the surface smooth and blue, but still these great rollers would be running along all the external coast, thundering and thundering by day and night; and i scarce believe there is one spot in the island where a man would be out of earshot of their noise.
i walked along beside the surf with great enjoyment, till, thinking i was now got far enough to the south, i took the cover of some thick bushes and crept warily up to the ridge of the spit.
behind me was the sea, in front the anchorage.
the sea breeze, as though it had the sooner blown itself out by its unusual violence, was already at an end; it had been succeeded by light, variable airs from the south and south-east, carrying great banks of fog; and the anchorage, under lee of skeleton island, lay still and leaden as when first we entered it.
the hispaniola, in that unbroken mirror, was exactly portrayed from the truck to the waterline, the jolly roger hanging from her peak.
alongside lay one of the gigs, silver in the stern-sheets -- him i could always recognize -- while a couple of men were leaning over the stern bulwarks, one of them with a red cap -- the very rogue that i had seen some hours before stride-legs upon the palisade.
apparently they were talking and laughing, though at that distance -- upwards of a mile -- i could, of course, hear no word of what was said.
all at once there began the most horrid, unearthly screaming, which at first startled me badly, though i had soon remembered the voice of captain flint and even thought i could make out the bird by her bright plumage as she sat perched upon her master's wrist.
soon after, the jolly-boat shoved off and pulled for shore, and the man with the red cap and his comrade went below by the cabin companion.
just about the same time, the sun had gone down behind the spy-glass, and as the fog was collecting rapidly, it began to grow dark in earnest.
i saw i must lose no time if i were to find the boat that evening.
the white rock, visible enough above the brush, was still some eighth of a mile further down the spit, and it took me a goodish while to get up with it, crawling, often on all fours, among the scrub.
night had almost come when i laid my hand on its rough sides.
right below it there was an exceedingly small hollow of green turf, hidden by banks and a thick underwood about knee-deep, that grew there very plentifully; and in the centre of the dell, sure enough, a little tent of goat-skins, like what the gipsies carry about with them in england.
i dropped into the hollow, lifted the side of the tent, and there was ben gunn's boat -- home-made if ever anything was home-made; a rude, lop-sided framework of tough wood, and stretched upon that a covering of goat-skin, with the hair inside.
the thing was extremely small, even for me, and i can hardly imagine that it could have floated with a full-sized man.
there was one thwart set as low as possible, a kind of stretcher in the bows, and a double paddle for propulsion.
i had not then seen a coracle, such as the ancient britons made, but i have seen one since, and i can give you no fairer idea of ben gunn's boat than by saying it was like the first and the worst coracle ever made by man.
but the great advantage of the coracle it certainly possessed, for it was exceedingly light and portable.
well, now that i had found the boat, you would have thought i had had enough of truantry for once, but in the meantime i had taken another notion and become so obstinately fond of it that i would have carried it out, i believe, in the teeth of captain smollett himself.
this was to slip out under cover of the night, cut the hispaniola adrift, and let her go ashore where she fancied.
i had quite made up my mind that the mutineers, after their repulse of the morning, had nothing nearer their hearts than to up anchor and away to sea; this, i thought, it would be a fine thing to prevent, and now that i had seen how they left their watchmen unprovided with a boat, i thought it might be done with little risk.
down i sat to wait for darkness, and made a hearty meal of biscuit.
it was a night out of ten thousand for my purpose.
the fog had now buried all heaven.
as the last rays of daylight dwindled and disappeared, absolute blackness settled down on treasure island.
and when, at last, i shouldered the coracle and groped my way stumblingly out of the hollow where i had supped, there were but two points visible on the whole anchorage.
one was the great fire on shore, by which the defeated pirates lay carousing in the swamp.
the other, a mere blur of light upon the darkness, indicated the position of the anchored ship.
she had swung round to the ebb -- her bow was now towards me -- the only lights on board were in the cabin, and what i saw was merely a reflection on the fog of the strong rays that flowed from the stern window.
the ebb had already run some time, and i had to wade through a long belt of swampy sand, where i sank several times above the ankle, before i came to the edge of the retreating water, and wading a little way in, with some strength and dexterity, set my coracle, keel downwards, on the surface.
23 the ebb-tide runs the coracle -- as i had ample reason to know before i was done with her -- was a very safe boat for a person of my height and weight, both buoyant and clever in a seaway; but she was the most cross-grained, lop-sided craft to manage.
do as you pleased, she always made more leeway than anything else, and turning round and round was the manoeuvre she was best at.
even ben gunn himself has admitted that she was "queer to handle till you knew her way."
certainly i did not know her way.
she turned in every direction but the one i was bound to go; the most part of the time we were broadside on, and i am very sure i never should have made the ship at all but for the tide.
by good fortune, paddle as i pleased, the tide was still sweeping me down; and there lay the hispaniola right in the fairway, hardly to be missed.
first she loomed before me like a blot of something yet blacker than darkness, then her spars and hull began to take shape, and the next moment, as it seemed -lrb- for, the farther i went, the brisker grew the current of the ebb -rrb-, i was alongside of her hawser and had laid hold.
the hawser was as taut as a bowstring, and the current so strong she pulled upon her anchor.
all round the hull, in the blackness, the rippling current bubbled and chattered like a little mountain stream.
one cut with my sea-gully and the hispaniola would go humming down the tide.
so far so good, but it next occurred to my recollection that a taut hawser, suddenly cut, is a thing as dangerous as a kicking horse.
ten to one, if i were so foolhardy as to cut the hispaniola from her anchor, i and the coracle would be knocked clean out of the water.
this brought me to a full stop, and if fortune had not again particularly favoured me, i should have had to abandon my design.
but the light airs which had begun blowing from the south-east and south had hauled round after nightfall into the south-west.
just while i was meditating, a puff came, caught the hispaniola, and forced her up into the current; and to my great joy, i felt the hawser slacken in my grasp, and the hand by which i held it dip for a second under water.
with that i made my mind up, took out my gully, opened it with my teeth, and cut one strand after another, till the vessel swung only by two.
then i lay quiet, waiting to sever these last when the strain should be once more lightened by a breath of wind.
all this time i had heard the sound of loud voices from the cabin, but to say truth, my mind had been so entirely taken up with other thoughts that i had scarcely given ear.
now, however, when i had nothing else to do, i began to pay more heed.
one i recognized for the coxswain's, israel hands, that had been flint's gunner in former days.
the other was, of course, my friend of the red night-cap.
both men were plainly the worse of drink, and they were still drinking, for even while i was listening, one of them, with a drunken cry, opened the stern window and threw out something, which i divined to be an empty bottle.
but they were not only tipsy; it was plain that they were furiously angry.
oaths flew like hailstones, and every now and then there came forth such an explosion as i thought was sure to end in blows.
but each time the quarrel passed off and the voices grumbled lower for a while, until the next crisis came and in its turn passed away without result.
on shore, i could see the glow of the great camp-fire burning warmly through the shore-side trees.
someone was singing, a dull, old, droning sailor's song, with a droop and a quaver at the end of every verse, and seemingly no end to it at all but the patience of the singer.
i had heard it on the voyage more than once and remembered these words: "but one man of her crew alive, what put to sea with seventy-five."
and i thought it was a ditty rather too dolefully appropriate for a company that had met such cruel losses in the morning.
but, indeed, from what i saw, all these buccaneers were as callous as the sea they sailed on.
at last the breeze came; the schooner sidled and drew nearer in the dark; i felt the hawser slacken once more, and with a good, tough effort, cut the last fibres through.
the breeze had but little action on the coracle, and i was almost instantly swept against the bows of the hispaniola.
at the same time, the schooner began to turn upon her heel, spinning slowly, end for end, across the current.
i wrought like a fiend, for i expected every moment to be swamped; and since i found i could not push the coracle directly off, i now shoved straight astern.
at length i was clear of my dangerous neighbour, and just as i gave the last impulsion, my hands came across a light cord that was trailing overboard across the stern bulwarks.
instantly i grasped it.
why i should have done so i can hardly say.
it was at first mere instinct, but once i had it in my hands and found it fast, curiosity began to get the upper hand, and i determined i should have one look through the cabin window.
i pulled in hand over hand on the cord, and when i judged myself near enough, rose at infinite risk to about half my height and thus commanded the roof and a slice of the interior of the cabin.
by this time the schooner and her little consort were gliding pretty swiftly through the water; indeed, we had already fetched up level with the camp-fire.
the ship was talking, as sailors say, loudly, treading the innumerable ripples with an incessant weltering splash; and until i got my eye above the window-sill i could not comprehend why the watchmen had taken no alarm.
one glance, however, was sufficient; and it was only one glance that i durst take from that unsteady skiff.
it showed me hands and his companion locked together in deadly wrestle, each with a hand upon the other's throat.
i dropped upon the thwart again, none too soon, for i was near overboard.
i could see nothing for the moment but these two furious, encrimsoned faces swaying together under the smoky lamp, and i shut my eyes to let them grow once more familiar with the darkness.
the endless ballad had come to an end at last, and the whole diminished company about the camp-fire had broken into the chorus i had heard so often: "fifteen men on the dead man's chest -- yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
drink and the devil had done for the rest -- yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"
i was just thinking how busy drink and the devil were at that very moment in the cabin of the hispaniola, when i was surprised by a sudden lurch of the coracle.
at the same moment, she yawed sharply and seemed to change her course.
the speed in the meantime had strangely increased.
i opened my eyes at once.
all round me were little ripples, combing over with a sharp, bristling sound and slightly phosphorescent.
the hispaniola herself, a few yards in whose wake i was still being whirled along, seemed to stagger in her course, and i saw her spars toss a little against the blackness of the night; nay, as i looked longer, i made sure she also was wheeling to the southward.
i glanced over my shoulder, and my heart jumped against my ribs.
there, right behind me, was the glow of the camp-fire.
the current had turned at right angles, sweeping round along with it the tall schooner and the little dancing coracle; ever quickening, ever bubbling higher, ever muttering louder, it went spinning through the narrows for the open sea.
suddenly the schooner in front of me gave a violent yaw, turning, perhaps, through twenty degrees; and almost at the same moment one shout followed another from on board; i could hear feet pounding on the companion ladder and i knew that the two drunkards had at last been interrupted in their quarrel and awakened to a sense of their disaster.
i lay down flat in the bottom of that wretched skiff and devoutly recommended my spirit to its maker.
at the end of the straits, i made sure we must fall into some bar of raging breakers, where all my troubles would be ended speedily; and though i could, perhaps, bear to die, i could not bear to look upon my fate as it approached.
so i must have lain for hours, continually beaten to and fro upon the billows, now and again wetted with flying sprays, and never ceasing to expect death at the next plunge.
gradually weariness grew upon me; a numbness, an occasional stupor, fell upon my mind even in the midst of my terrors, until sleep at last supervened and in my sea-tossed coracle i lay and dreamed of home and the old admiral benbow.
24 the cruise of the coracle it was broad day when i awoke and found myself tossing at the south-west end of treasure island.
the sun was up but was still hid from me behind the great bulk of the spy-glass, which on this side descended almost to the sea in formidable cliffs.
haulbowline head and mizzen-mast hill were at my elbow, the hill bare and dark, the head bound with cliffs forty or fifty feet high and fringed with great masses of fallen rock.
i was scarce a quarter of a mile to seaward, and it was my first thought to paddle in and land.
that notion was soon given over.
among the fallen rocks the breakers spouted and bellowed; loud reverberations, heavy sprays flying and falling, succeeded one another from second to second; and i saw myself, if i ventured nearer, dashed to death upon the rough shore or spending my strength in vain to scale the beetling crags.
nor was that all, for crawling together on flat tables of rock or letting themselves drop into the sea with loud reports i beheld huge slimy monsters -- soft snails, as it were, of incredible bigness -- two or three score of them together, making the rocks to echo with their barkings.
i have understood since that they were sea lions, and entirely harmless.
but the look of them, added to the difficulty of the shore and the high running of the surf, was more than enough to disgust me of that landing-place.
i felt willing rather to starve at sea than to confront such perils.
in the meantime i had a better chance, as i supposed, before me.
north of haulbowline head, the land runs in a long way, leaving at low tide a long stretch of yellow sand.
to the north of that, again, there comes another cape -- cape of the woods, as it was marked upon the chart -- buried in tall green pines, which descended to the margin of the sea.
i remembered what silver had said about the current that sets northward along the whole west coast of treasure island, and seeing from my position that i was already under its influence, i preferred to leave haulbowline head behind me and reserve my strength for an attempt to land upon the kindlier-looking cape of the woods.
there was a great, smooth swell upon the sea.
the wind blowing steady and gentle from the south, there was no contrariety between that and the current, and the billows rose and fell unbroken.
had it been otherwise, i must long ago have perished; but as it was, it is surprising how easily and securely my little and light boat could ride.
often, as i still lay at the bottom and kept no more than an eye above the gunwale, i would see a big blue summit heaving close above me; yet the coracle would but bounce a little, dance as if on springs, and subside on the other side into the trough as lightly as a bird.
i began after a little to grow very bold and sat up to try my skill at paddling.
but even a small change in the disposition of the weight will produce violent changes in the behaviour of a coracle.
and i had hardly moved before the boat, giving up at once her gentle dancing movement, ran straight down a slope of water so steep that it made me giddy, and struck her nose, with a spout of spray, deep into the side of the next wave.
i was drenched and terrified, and fell instantly back into my old position, whereupon the coracle seemed to find her head again and led me as softly as before among the billows.
it was plain she was not to be interfered with, and at that rate, since i could in no way influence her course, what hope had i left of reaching land?
i began to be horribly frightened, but i kept my head, for all that.
first, moving with all care, i gradually baled out the coracle with my sea-cap; then, getting my eye once more above the gunwale, i set myself to study how it was she managed to slip so quietly through the rollers.
i found each wave, instead of the big, smooth glossy mountain it looks from shore or from a vessel's deck, was for all the world like any range of hills on dry land, full of peaks and smooth places and valleys.
the coracle, left to herself, turning from side to side, threaded, so to speak, her way through these lower parts and avoided the steep slopes and higher, toppling summits of the wave.
""well, now," thought i to myself, "it is plain i must lie where i am and not disturb the balance; but it is plain also that i can put the paddle over the side and from time to time, in smooth places, give her a shove or two towards land."
no sooner thought upon than done.
there i lay on my elbows in the most trying attitude, and every now and again gave a weak stroke or two to turn her head to shore.
it was very tiring and slow work, yet i did visibly gain ground; and as we drew near the cape of the woods, though i saw i must infallibly miss that point, i had still made some hundred yards of easting.
i was, indeed, close in.
i could see the cool green tree-tops swaying together in the breeze, and i felt sure i should make the next promontory without fail.
it was high time, for i now began to be tortured with thirst.
the glow of the sun from above, its thousandfold reflection from the waves, the sea-water that fell and dried upon me, caking my very lips with salt, combined to make my throat burn and my brain ache.
the sight of the trees so near at hand had almost made me sick with longing, but the current had soon carried me past the point, and as the next reach of sea opened out, i beheld a sight that changed the nature of my thoughts.
right in front of me, not half a mile away, i beheld the hispaniola under sail.
i made sure, of course, that i should be taken; but i was so distressed for want of water that i scarce knew whether to be glad or sorry at the thought, and long before i had come to a conclusion, surprise had taken entire possession of my mind and i could do nothing but stare and wonder.
the hispaniola was under her main-sail and two jibs, and the beautiful white canvas shone in the sun like snow or silver.
when i first sighted her, all her sails were drawing; she was lying a course about north-west, and i presumed the men on board were going round the island on their way back to the anchorage.
presently she began to fetch more and more to the westward, so that i thought they had sighted me and were going about in chase.
at last, however, she fell right into the wind's eye, was taken dead aback, and stood there awhile helpless, with her sails shivering.
""clumsy fellows," said i; "they must still be drunk as owls."
and i thought how captain smollett would have set them skipping.
meanwhile the schooner gradually fell off and filled again upon another tack, sailed swiftly for a minute or so, and brought up once more dead in the wind's eye.
again and again was this repeated.
to and fro, up and down, north, south, east, and west, the hispaniola sailed by swoops and dashes, and at each repetition ended as she had begun, with idly flapping canvas.
it became plain to me that nobody was steering.
and if so, where were the men?
either they were dead drunk or had deserted her, i thought, and perhaps if i could get on board i might return the vessel to her captain.
the current was bearing coracle and schooner southward at an equal rate.
as for the latter's sailing, it was so wild and intermittent, and she hung each time so long in irons, that she certainly gained nothing, if she did not even lose.
if only i dared to sit up and paddle, i made sure that i could overhaul her.
the scheme had an air of adventure that inspired me, and the thought of the water breaker beside the fore companion doubled my growing courage.
up i got, was welcomed almost instantly by another cloud of spray, but this time stuck to my purpose and set myself, with all my strength and caution, to paddle after the unsteered hispaniola.
once i shipped a sea so heavy that i had to stop and bail, with my heart fluttering like a bird, but gradually i got into the way of the thing and guided my coracle among the waves, with only now and then a blow upon her bows and a dash of foam in my face.
i was now gaining rapidly on the schooner; i could see the brass glisten on the tiller as it banged about, and still no soul appeared upon her decks.
i could not choose but suppose she was deserted.
if not, the men were lying drunk below, where i might batten them down, perhaps, and do what i chose with the ship.
for some time she had been doing the worse thing possible for me -- standing still.
she headed nearly due south, yawing, of course, all the time.
each time she fell off, her sails partly filled, and these brought her in a moment right to the wind again.
i have said this was the worst thing possible for me, for helpless as she looked in this situation, with the canvas cracking like cannon and the blocks trundling and banging on the deck, she still continued to run away from me, not only with the speed of the current, but by the whole amount of her leeway, which was naturally great.
but now, at last, i had my chance.
the breeze fell for some seconds, very low, and the current gradually turning her, the hispaniola revolved slowly round her centre and at last presented me her stern, with the cabin window still gaping open and the lamp over the table still burning on into the day.
the main-sail hung drooped like a banner.
she was stock-still but for the current.
for the last little while i had even lost, but now redoubling my efforts, i began once more to overhaul the chase.
i was not a hundred yards from her when the wind came again in a clap; she filled on the port tack and was off again, stooping and skimming like a swallow.
my first impulse was one of despair, but my second was towards joy.
round she came, till she was broadside on to me -- round still till she had covered a half and then two thirds and then three quarters of the distance that separated us.
i could see the waves boiling white under her forefoot.
immensely tall she looked to me from my low station in the coracle.
and then, of a sudden, i began to comprehend.
i had scarce time to think -- scarce time to act and save myself.
i was on the summit of one swell when the schooner came stooping over the next.
the bowsprit was over my head.
i sprang to my feet and leaped, stamping the coracle under water.
with one hand i caught the jib-boom, while my foot was lodged between the stay and the brace; and as i still clung there panting, a dull blow told me that the schooner had charged down upon and struck the coracle and that i was left without retreat on the hispaniola.
25 i strike the jolly roger i had scarce gained a position on the bowsprit when the flying jib flapped and filled upon the other tack, with a report like a gun.
the schooner trembled to her keel under the reverse, but next moment, the other sails still drawing, the jib flapped back again and hung idle.
this had nearly tossed me off into the sea; and now i lost no time, crawled back along the bowsprit, and tumbled head foremost on the deck.
i was on the lee side of the forecastle, and the mainsail, which was still drawing, concealed from me a certain portion of the after-deck.
not a soul was to be seen.
the planks, which had not been swabbed since the mutiny, bore the print of many feet, and an empty bottle, broken by the neck, tumbled to and fro like a live thing in the scuppers.
suddenly the hispaniola came right into the wind.
the jibs behind me cracked aloud, the rudder slammed to, the whole ship gave a sickening heave and shudder, and at the same moment the main-boom swung inboard, the sheet groaning in the blocks, and showed me the lee after-deck.
there were the two watchmen, sure enough: red-cap on his back, as stiff as a handspike, with his arms stretched out like those of a crucifix and his teeth showing through his open lips; israel hands propped against the bulwarks, his chin on his chest, his hands lying open before him on the deck, his face as white, under its tan, as a tallow candle.
for a while the ship kept bucking and sidling like a vicious horse, the sails filling, now on one tack, now on another, and the boom swinging to and fro till the mast groaned aloud under the strain.
now and again too there would come a cloud of light sprays over the bulwark and a heavy blow of the ship's bows against the swell; so much heavier weather was made of it by this great rigged ship than by my home-made, lop-sided coracle, now gone to the bottom of the sea.
at every jump of the schooner, red-cap slipped to and fro, but -- what was ghastly to behold -- neither his attitude nor his fixed teeth-disclosing grin was anyway disturbed by this rough usage.
at every jump too, hands appeared still more to sink into himself and settle down upon the deck, his feet sliding ever the farther out, and the whole body canting towards the stern, so that his face became, little by little, hid from me; and at last i could see nothing beyond his ear and the frayed ringlet of one whisker.
at the same time, i observed, around both of them, splashes of dark blood upon the planks and began to feel sure that they had killed each other in their drunken wrath.
while i was thus looking and wondering, in a calm moment, when the ship was still, israel hands turned partly round and with a low moan writhed himself back to the position in which i had seen him first.
the moan, which told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way in which his jaw hung open went right to my heart.
but when i remembered the talk i had overheard from the apple barrel, all pity left me.
i walked aft until i reached the main-mast.
""come aboard, mr. hands," i said ironically.
he rolled his eyes round heavily, but he was too far gone to express surprise.
all he could do was to utter one word, "brandy."
it occurred to me there was no time to lose, and dodging the boom as it once more lurched across the deck, i slipped aft and down the companion stairs into the cabin.
it was such a scene of confusion as you can hardly fancy.
all the lockfast places had been broken open in quest of the chart.
the floor was thick with mud where ruffians had sat down to drink or consult after wading in the marshes round their camp.
the bulkheads, all painted in clear white and beaded round with gilt, bore a pattern of dirty hands.
dozens of empty bottles clinked together in corners to the rolling of the ship.
one of the doctor's medical books lay open on the table, half of the leaves gutted out, i suppose, for pipelights.
in the midst of all this the lamp still cast a smoky glow, obscure and brown as umber.
i went into the cellar; all the barrels were gone, and of the bottles a most surprising number had been drunk out and thrown away.
certainly, since the mutiny began, not a man of them could ever have been sober.
foraging about, i found a bottle with some brandy left, for hands; and for myself i routed out some biscuit, some pickled fruits, a great bunch of raisins, and a piece of cheese.
with these i came on deck, put down my own stock behind the rudder head and well out of the coxswain's reach, went forward to the water-breaker, and had a good deep drink of water, and then, and not till then, gave hands the brandy.
he must have drunk a gill before he took the bottle from his mouth.
""aye," said he, "by thunder, but i wanted some o" that!"
i had sat down already in my own corner and begun to eat.
""much hurt?"
i asked him.
he grunted, or rather, i might say, he barked.
""if that doctor was aboard," he said, "i'd be right enough in a couple of turns, but i do n't have no manner of luck, you see, and that's what's the matter with me.
as for that swab, he's good and dead, he is," he added, indicating the man with the red cap.
""he war n't no seaman anyhow.
and where mought you have come from?"
""well," said i, "i've come aboard to take possession of this ship, mr. hands; and you'll please regard me as your captain until further notice."
he looked at me sourly enough but said nothing.
some of the colour had come back into his cheeks, though he still looked very sick and still continued to slip out and settle down as the ship banged about.
""by the by," i continued, "i ca n't have these colours, mr. hands; and by your leave, i'll strike'em.
better none than these."
and again dodging the boom, i ran to the colour lines, handed down their cursed black flag, and chucked it overboard.
""god save the king!"
said i, waving my cap.
""and there's an end to captain silver!"
he watched me keenly and slyly, his chin all the while on his breast.
""i reckon," he said at last, "i reckon, cap'n hawkins, you'll kind of want to get ashore now.
s'pose we talks."
""why, yes," says i, "with all my heart, mr. hands.
say on."
and i went back to my meal with a good appetite.
""this man," he began, nodding feebly at the corpse" -- o'brien were his name, a rank irelander -- this man and me got the canvas on her, meaning for to sail her back.
well, he's dead now, he is -- as dead as bilge; and who's to sail this ship, i do n't see.
without i gives you a hint, you ai n't that man, as far's i can tell.
now, look here, you gives me food and drink and a old scarf or ankecher to tie my wound up, you do, and i'll tell you how to sail her, and that's about square all round, i take it."
""i'll tell you one thing," says i: "i'm not going back to captain kidd's anchorage.
i mean to get into north inlet and beach her quietly there."
""to be sure you did," he cried.
""why, i ai n't sich an infernal lubber after all.
i can see, ca n't i?
i've tried my fling, i have, and i've lost, and it's you has the wind of me.
north inlet?
why, i have n't no ch "ice, not i!
i'd help you sail her up to execution dock, by thunder!
so i would."
well, as it seemed to me, there was some sense in this.
we struck our bargain on the spot.
in three minutes i had the hispaniola sailing easily before the wind along the coast of treasure island, with good hopes of turning the northern point ere noon and beating down again as far as north inlet before high water, when we might beach her safely and wait till the subsiding tide permitted us to land.
then i lashed the tiller and went below to my own chest, where i got a soft silk handkerchief of my mother's.
with this, and with my aid, hands bound up the great bleeding stab he had received in the thigh, and after he had eaten a little and had a swallow or two more of the brandy, he began to pick up visibly, sat straighter up, spoke louder and clearer, and looked in every way another man.
the breeze served us admirably.
we skimmed before it like a bird, the coast of the island flashing by and the view changing every minute.
soon we were past the high lands and bowling beside low, sandy country, sparsely dotted with dwarf pines, and soon we were beyond that again and had turned the corner of the rocky hill that ends the island on the north.
i was greatly elated with my new command, and pleased with the bright, sunshiny weather and these different prospects of the coast.
i had now plenty of water and good things to eat, and my conscience, which had smitten me hard for my desertion, was quieted by the great conquest i had made.
i should, i think, have had nothing left me to desire but for the eyes of the coxswain as they followed me derisively about the deck and the odd smile that appeared continually on his face.
it was a smile that had in it something both of pain and weakness -- a haggard old man's smile; but there was, besides that, a grain of derision, a shadow of treachery, in his expression as he craftily watched, and watched, and watched me at my work.
26 israel hands the wind, serving us to a desire, now hauled into the west.
we could run so much the easier from the north-east corner of the island to the mouth of the north inlet.
only, as we had no power to anchor and dared not beach her till the tide had flowed a good deal farther, time hung on our hands.
the coxswain told me how to lay the ship to; after a good many trials i succeeded, and we both sat in silence over another meal.
""cap'n," said he at length with that same uncomfortable smile, "here's my old shipmate, o'brien; s "pose you was to heave him overboard.
i ai n't partic "lar as a rule, and i do n't take no blame for settling his hash, but i do n't reckon him ornamental now, do you?"
""i'm not strong enough, and i do n't like the job; and there he lies, for me," said i. "this here's an unlucky ship, this hispaniola, jim," he went on, blinking.
""there's a power of men been killed in this hispaniola -- a sight o" poor seamen dead and gone since you and me took ship to bristol.
i never seen sich dirty luck, not i.
there was this here o'brien now -- he's dead, ai n't he?
well now, i'm no scholar, and you're a lad as can read and figure, and to put it straight, do you take it as a dead man is dead for good, or do he come alive again?"
""you can kill the body, mr. hands, but not the spirit; you must know that already," i replied.
""o'brien there is in another world, and may be watching us."
""ah!"
says he.
""well, that's unfort "nate -- appears as if killing parties was a waste of time.
howsomever, sperrits do n't reckon for much, by what i've seen.
i'll chance it with the sperrits, jim.
and now, you've spoke up free, and i'll take it kind if you'd step down into that there cabin and get me a -- well, a -- shiver my timbers!
i ca n't hit the name on "t; well, you get me a bottle of wine, jim -- this here brandy's too strong for my head."
now, the coxswain's hesitation seemed to be unnatural, and as for the notion of his preferring wine to brandy, i entirely disbelieved it.
the whole story was a pretext.
he wanted me to leave the deck -- so much was plain; but with what purpose i could in no way imagine.
his eyes never met mine; they kept wandering to and fro, up and down, now with a look to the sky, now with a flitting glance upon the dead o'brien.
all the time he kept smiling and putting his tongue out in the most guilty, embarrassed manner, so that a child could have told that he was bent on some deception.
i was prompt with my answer, however, for i saw where my advantage lay and that with a fellow so densely stupid i could easily conceal my suspicions to the end.
""some wine?"
i said.
""far better.
will you have white or red?"
""well, i reckon it's about the blessed same to me, shipmate," he replied; "so it's strong, and plenty of it, what's the odds?"
""all right," i answered.
""i'll bring you port, mr. hands.
but i'll have to dig for it."
with that i scuttled down the companion with all the noise i could, slipped off my shoes, ran quietly along the sparred gallery, mounted the forecastle ladder, and popped my head out of the fore companion.
i knew he would not expect to see me there, yet i took every precaution possible, and certainly the worst of my suspicions proved too true.
he had risen from his position to his hands and knees, and though his leg obviously hurt him pretty sharply when he moved -- for i could hear him stifle a groan -- yet it was at a good, rattling rate that he trailed himself across the deck.
in half a minute he had reached the port scuppers and picked, out of a coil of rope, a long knife, or rather a short dirk, discoloured to the hilt with blood.
he looked upon it for a moment, thrusting forth his under jaw, tried the point upon his hand, and then, hastily concealing it in the bosom of his jacket, trundled back again into his old place against the bulwark.
this was all that i required to know.
israel could move about, he was now armed, and if he had been at so much trouble to get rid of me, it was plain that i was meant to be the victim.
what he would do afterwards -- whether he would try to crawl right across the island from north inlet to the camp among the swamps or whether he would fire long tom, trusting that his own comrades might come first to help him -- was, of course, more than i could say.
yet i felt sure that i could trust him in one point, since in that our interests jumped together, and that was in the disposition of the schooner.
we both desired to have her stranded safe enough, in a sheltered place, and so that, when the time came, she could be got off again with as little labour and danger as might be; and until that was done i considered that my life would certainly be spared.
while i was thus turning the business over in my mind, i had not been idle with my body.
i had stolen back to the cabin, slipped once more into my shoes, and laid my hand at random on a bottle of wine, and now, with this for an excuse, i made my reappearance on the deck.
hands lay as i had left him, all fallen together in a bundle and with his eyelids lowered as though he were too weak to bear the light.
he looked up, however, at my coming, knocked the neck off the bottle like a man who had done the same thing often, and took a good swig, with his favourite toast of "here's luck!"
then he lay quiet for a little, and then, pulling out a stick of tobacco, begged me to cut him a quid.
""cut me a junk o" that," says he, "for i have n't no knife and hardly strength enough, so be as i had.
ah, jim, jim, i reckon i've missed stays!
cut me a quid, as'll likely be the last, lad, for i'm for my long home, and no mistake."
""well," said i, "i'll cut you some tobacco, but if i was you and thought myself so badly, i would go to my prayers like a christian man."
""why?"
said he.
""now, you tell me why."
""why?"
i cried.
""you were asking me just now about the dead.
you've broken your trust; you've lived in sin and lies and blood; there's a man you killed lying at your feet this moment, and you ask me why!
for god's mercy, mr. hands, that's why."
i spoke with a little heat, thinking of the bloody dirk he had hidden in his pocket and designed, in his ill thoughts, to end me with.
he, for his part, took a great draught of the wine and spoke with the most unusual solemnity.
""for thirty years," he said, "i've sailed the seas and seen good and bad, better and worse, fair weather and foul, provisions running out, knives going, and what not.
well, now i tell you, i never seen good come o" goodness yet.
him as strikes first is my fancy; dead men do n't bite; them's my views -- amen, so be it.
and now, you look here," he added, suddenly changing his tone, "we've had about enough of this foolery.
the tide's made good enough by now.
you just take my orders, cap'n hawkins, and we'll sail slap in and be done with it."
all told, we had scarce two miles to run; but the navigation was delicate, the entrance to this northern anchorage was not only narrow and shoal, but lay east and west, so that the schooner must be nicely handled to be got in.
i think i was a good, prompt subaltern, and i am very sure that hands was an excellent pilot, for we went about and about and dodged in, shaving the banks, with a certainty and a neatness that were a pleasure to behold.
scarcely had we passed the heads before the land closed around us.
the shores of north inlet were as thickly wooded as those of the southern anchorage, but the space was longer and narrower and more like, what in truth it was, the estuary of a river.
right before us, at the southern end, we saw the wreck of a ship in the last stages of dilapidation.
it had been a great vessel of three masts but had lain so long exposed to the injuries of the weather that it was hung about with great webs of dripping seaweed, and on the deck of it shore bushes had taken root and now flourished thick with flowers.
it was a sad sight, but it showed us that the anchorage was calm.
""now," said hands, "look there; there's a pet bit for to beach a ship in.
fine flat sand, never a cat's paw, trees all around of it, and flowers a-blowing like a garding on that old ship."
""and once beached," i inquired, "how shall we get her off again?"
""why, so," he replied: "you take a line ashore there on the other side at low water, take a turn about one of them big pines; bring it back, take a turn around the capstan, and lie to for the tide.
come high water, all hands take a pull upon the line, and off she comes as sweet as natur".
and now, boy, you stand by.
we're near the bit now, and she's too much way on her.
starboard a little -- so -- steady -- starboard -- larboard a little -- steady -- steady!"
so he issued his commands, which i breathlessly obeyed, till, all of a sudden, he cried, "now, my hearty, luff!"
and i put the helm hard up, and the hispaniola swung round rapidly and ran stem on for the low, wooded shore.
the excitement of these last manoeuvres had somewhat interfered with the watch i had kept hitherto, sharply enough, upon the coxswain.
even then i was still so much interested, waiting for the ship to touch, that i had quite forgot the peril that hung over my head and stood craning over the starboard bulwarks and watching the ripples spreading wide before the bows.
i might have fallen without a struggle for my life had not a sudden disquietude seized upon me and made me turn my head.
perhaps i had heard a creak or seen his shadow moving with the tail of my eye; perhaps it was an instinct like a cat's; but, sure enough, when i looked round, there was hands, already half-way towards me, with the dirk in his right hand.
we must both have cried out aloud when our eyes met, but while mine was the shrill cry of terror, his was a roar of fury like a charging bully's.
at the same instant, he threw himself forward and i leapt sideways towards the bows.
as i did so, i let go of the tiller, which sprang sharp to leeward, and i think this saved my life, for it struck hands across the chest and stopped him, for the moment, dead.
before he could recover, i was safe out of the corner where he had me trapped, with all the deck to dodge about.
just forward of the main-mast i stopped, drew a pistol from my pocket, took a cool aim, though he had already turned and was once more coming directly after me, and drew the trigger.
the hammer fell, but there followed neither flash nor sound; the priming was useless with sea-water.
i cursed myself for my neglect.
why had not i, long before, reprimed and reloaded my only weapons?
then i should not have been as now, a mere fleeing sheep before this butcher.
wounded as he was, it was wonderful how fast he could move, his grizzled hair tumbling over his face, and his face itself as red as a red ensign with his haste and fury.
i had no time to try my other pistol, nor indeed much inclination, for i was sure it would be useless.
one thing i saw plainly: i must not simply retreat before him, or he would speedily hold me boxed into the bows, as a moment since he had so nearly boxed me in the stern.
once so caught, and nine or ten inches of the blood-stained dirk would be my last experience on this side of eternity.
i placed my palms against the main-mast, which was of a goodish bigness, and waited, every nerve upon the stretch.
seeing that i meant to dodge, he also paused; and a moment or two passed in feints on his part and corresponding movements upon mine.
it was such a game as i had often played at home about the rocks of black hill cove, but never before, you may be sure, with such a wildly beating heart as now.
still, as i say, it was a boy's game, and i thought i could hold my own at it against an elderly seaman with a wounded thigh.
indeed my courage had begun to rise so high that i allowed myself a few darting thoughts on what would be the end of the affair, and while i saw certainly that i could spin it out for long, i saw no hope of any ultimate escape.
well, while things stood thus, suddenly the hispaniola struck, staggered, ground for an instant in the sand, and then, swift as a blow, canted over to the port side till the deck stood at an angle of forty-five degrees and about a puncheon of water splashed into the scupper holes and lay, in a pool, between the deck and bulwark.
we were both of us capsized in a second, and both of us rolled, almost together, into the scuppers, the dead red-cap, with his arms still spread out, tumbling stiffly after us.
so near were we, indeed, that my head came against the coxswain's foot with a crack that made my teeth rattle.
blow and all, i was the first afoot again, for hands had got involved with the dead body.
the sudden canting of the ship had made the deck no place for running on; i had to find some new way of escape, and that upon the instant, for my foe was almost touching me.
quick as thought, i sprang into the mizzen shrouds, rattled up hand over hand, and did not draw a breath till i was seated on the cross-trees.
i had been saved by being prompt; the dirk had struck not half a foot below me as i pursued my upward flight; and there stood israel hands with his mouth open and his face upturned to mine, a perfect statue of surprise and disappointment.
now that i had a moment to myself, i lost no time in changing the priming of my pistol, and then, having one ready for service, and to make assurance doubly sure, i proceeded to draw the load of the other and recharge it afresh from the beginning.
my new employment struck hands all of a heap; he began to see the dice going against him, and after an obvious hesitation, he also hauled himself heavily into the shrouds, and with the dirk in his teeth, began slowly and painfully to mount.
it cost him no end of time and groans to haul his wounded leg behind him, and i had quietly finished my arrangements before he was much more than a third of the way up.
then, with a pistol in either hand, i addressed him.
""one more step, mr. hands," said i, "and i'll blow your brains out!
dead men do n't bite, you know," i added with a chuckle.
he stopped instantly.
i could see by the working of his face that he was trying to think, and the process was so slow and laborious that, in my new-found security, i laughed aloud.
at last, with a swallow or two, he spoke, his face still wearing the same expression of extreme perplexity.
in order to speak he had to take the dagger from his mouth, but in all else he remained unmoved.
""jim," says he, "i reckon we're fouled, you and me, and we'll have to sign articles.
i'd have had you but for that there lurch, but i do n't have no luck, not i; and i reckon i'll have to strike, which comes hard, you see, for a master mariner to a ship's younker like you, jim."
i was drinking in his words and smiling away, as conceited as a cock upon a wall, when, all in a breath, back went his right hand over his shoulder.
something sang like an arrow through the air; i felt a blow and then a sharp pang, and there i was pinned by the shoulder to the mast.
in the horrid pain and surprise of the moment -- i scarce can say it was by my own volition, and i am sure it was without a conscious aim -- both my pistols went off, and both escaped out of my hands.
they did not fall alone; with a choked cry, the coxswain loosed his grasp upon the shrouds and plunged head first into the water.
27 "pieces of eight" owing to the cant of the vessel, the masts hung far out over the water, and from my perch on the cross-trees i had nothing below me but the surface of the bay.
hands, who was not so far up, was in consequence nearer to the ship and fell between me and the bulwarks.
he rose once to the surface in a lather of foam and blood and then sank again for good.
as the water settled, i could see him lying huddled together on the clean, bright sand in the shadow of the vessel's sides.
a fish or two whipped past his body.
sometimes, by the quivering of the water, he appeared to move a little, as if he were trying to rise.
but he was dead enough, for all that, being both shot and drowned, and was food for fish in the very place where he had designed my slaughter.
i was no sooner certain of this than i began to feel sick, faint, and terrified.
the hot blood was running over my back and chest.
the dirk, where it had pinned my shoulder to the mast, seemed to burn like a hot iron; yet it was not so much these real sufferings that distressed me, for these, it seemed to me, i could bear without a murmur; it was the horror i had upon my mind of falling from the cross-trees into that still green water, beside the body of the coxswain.
i clung with both hands till my nails ached, and i shut my eyes as if to cover up the peril.
gradually my mind came back again, my pulses quieted down to a more natural time, and i was once more in possession of myself.
it was my first thought to pluck forth the dirk, but either it stuck too hard or my nerve failed me, and i desisted with a violent shudder.
oddly enough, that very shudder did the business.
the knife, in fact, had come the nearest in the world to missing me altogether; it held me by a mere pinch of skin, and this the shudder tore away.
the blood ran down the faster, to be sure, but i was my own master again and only tacked to the mast by my coat and shirt.
these last i broke through with a sudden jerk, and then regained the deck by the starboard shrouds.
for nothing in the world would i have again ventured, shaken as i was, upon the overhanging port shrouds from which israel had so lately fallen.
i went below and did what i could for my wound; it pained me a good deal and still bled freely, but it was neither deep nor dangerous, nor did it greatly gall me when i used my arm.
then i looked around me, and as the ship was now, in a sense, my own, i began to think of clearing it from its last passenger -- the dead man, o'brien.
he had pitched, as i have said, against the bulwarks, where he lay like some horrible, ungainly sort of puppet, life-size, indeed, but how different from life's colour or life's comeliness!
in that position i could easily have my way with him, and as the habit of tragical adventures had worn off almost all my terror for the dead, i took him by the waist as if he had been a sack of bran and with one good heave, tumbled him overboard.
he went in with a sounding plunge; the red cap came off and remained floating on the surface; and as soon as the splash subsided, i could see him and israel lying side by side, both wavering with the tremulous movement of the water.
o'brien, though still quite a young man, was very bald.
there he lay, with that bald head across the knees of the man who had killed him and the quick fishes steering to and fro over both.
i was now alone upon the ship; the tide had just turned.
the sun was within so few degrees of setting that already the shadow of the pines upon the western shore began to reach right across the anchorage and fall in patterns on the deck.
the evening breeze had sprung up, and though it was well warded off by the hill with the two peaks upon the east, the cordage had begun to sing a little softly to itself and the idle sails to rattle to and fro.
i began to see a danger to the ship.
the jibs i speedily doused and brought tumbling to the deck, but the main-sail was a harder matter.
of course, when the schooner canted over, the boom had swung out-board, and the cap of it and a foot or two of sail hung even under water.
i thought this made it still more dangerous; yet the strain was so heavy that i half feared to meddle.
at last i got my knife and cut the halyards.
the peak dropped instantly, a great belly of loose canvas floated broad upon the water, and since, pull as i liked, i could not budge the downhall, that was the extent of what i could accomplish.
for the rest, the hispaniola must trust to luck, like myself.
by this time the whole anchorage had fallen into shadow -- the last rays, i remember, falling through a glade of the wood and shining bright as jewels on the flowery mantle of the wreck.
it began to be chill; the tide was rapidly fleeting seaward, the schooner settling more and more on her beam-ends.
i scrambled forward and looked over.
it seemed shallow enough, and holding the cut hawser in both hands for a last security, i let myself drop softly overboard.
the water scarcely reached my waist; the sand was firm and covered with ripple marks, and i waded ashore in great spirits, leaving the hispaniola on her side, with her main-sail trailing wide upon the surface of the bay.
about the same time, the sun went fairly down and the breeze whistled low in the dusk among the tossing pines.
at least, and at last, i was off the sea, nor had i returned thence empty-handed.
there lay the schooner, clear at last from buccaneers and ready for our own men to board and get to sea again.
i had nothing nearer my fancy than to get home to the stockade and boast of my achievements.
possibly i might be blamed a bit for my truantry, but the recapture of the hispaniola was a clenching answer, and i hoped that even captain smollett would confess i had not lost my time.
so thinking, and in famous spirits, i began to set my face homeward for the block house and my companions.
i remembered that the most easterly of the rivers which drain into captain kidd's anchorage ran from the two-peaked hill upon my left, and i bent my course in that direction that i might pass the stream while it was small.
the wood was pretty open, and keeping along the lower spurs, i had soon turned the corner of that hill, and not long after waded to the mid-calf across the watercourse.
this brought me near to where i had encountered ben gunn, the maroon; and i walked more circumspectly, keeping an eye on every side.
the dusk had come nigh hand completely, and as i opened out the cleft between the two peaks, i became aware of a wavering glow against the sky, where, as i judged, the man of the island was cooking his supper before a roaring fire.
and yet i wondered, in my heart, that he should show himself so careless.
for if i could see this radiance, might it not reach the eyes of silver himself where he camped upon the shore among the marshes?
gradually the night fell blacker; it was all i could do to guide myself even roughly towards my destination; the double hill behind me and the spy-glass on my right hand loomed faint and fainter; the stars were few and pale; and in the low ground where i wandered i kept tripping among bushes and rolling into sandy pits.
suddenly a kind of brightness fell about me.
i looked up; a pale glimmer of moonbeams had alighted on the summit of the spy-glass, and soon after i saw something broad and silvery moving low down behind the trees, and knew the moon had risen.
with this to help me, i passed rapidly over what remained to me of my journey, and sometimes walking, sometimes running, impatiently drew near to the stockade.
yet, as i began to thread the grove that lies before it, i was not so thoughtless but that i slacked my pace and went a trifle warily.
it would have been a poor end of my adventures to get shot down by my own party in mistake.
the moon was climbing higher and higher, its light began to fall here and there in masses through the more open districts of the wood, and right in front of me a glow of a different colour appeared among the trees.
it was red and hot, and now and again it was a little darkened -- as it were, the embers of a bonfire smouldering.
for the life of me i could not think what it might be.
at last i came right down upon the borders of the clearing.
the western end was already steeped in moonshine; the rest, and the block house itself, still lay in a black shadow chequered with long silvery streaks of light.
on the other side of the house an immense fire had burned itself into clear embers and shed a steady, red reverberation, contrasted strongly with the mellow paleness of the moon.
there was not a soul stirring nor a sound beside the noises of the breeze.
i stopped, with much wonder in my heart, and perhaps a little terror also.
it had not been our way to build great fires; we were, indeed, by the captain's orders, somewhat niggardly of firewood, and i began to fear that something had gone wrong while i was absent.
i stole round by the eastern end, keeping close in shadow, and at a convenient place, where the darkness was thickest, crossed the palisade.
to make assurance surer, i got upon my hands and knees and crawled, without a sound, towards the corner of the house.
as i drew nearer, my heart was suddenly and greatly lightened.
it is not a pleasant noise in itself, and i have often complained of it at other times, but just then it was like music to hear my friends snoring together so loud and peaceful in their sleep.
the sea-cry of the watch, that beautiful "all's well," never fell more reassuringly on my ear.
in the meantime, there was no doubt of one thing; they kept an infamous bad watch.
if it had been silver and his lads that were now creeping in on them, not a soul would have seen daybreak.
that was what it was, thought i, to have the captain wounded; and again i blamed myself sharply for leaving them in that danger with so few to mount guard.
