children_stories.txt
“if others have tried it,” said brother lustig, “i will try it too.”
“leave it alone,” said the host, “it will cost you your neck.” “it won’t kill me at once,” said brother lustig, “just give me the key, and some good food and wine.” so the host gave him the key, and food and wine, and with this brother lustig went into the castle, enjoyed his supper, and at length, as he was sleepy, he lay down on the ground, for there was no bed. he soon fell asleep, but during the night was disturbed by a great noise, and when he awoke, he saw nine ugly devils in the room, who had made a circle, and were dancing around him.
brother lustig said, “well, dance as long as you like, but none of you must come too close.” but the devils pressed continually nearer to him, and almost stepped on his face with their hideous feet. “stop, you devils’ ghosts,” said he, but they behaved still worse. then brother lustig grew angry, and cried, “hola! but i will soon make it quiet,”
and got the leg of a chair and struck out into the midst of them with it. but nine devils against one soldier were still too many, and when he struck those in front of him, the others seized him behind by the hair, and tore it unmercifully. “devils’ crew,” cried he, “it is getting too bad, but wait. into my knapsack, all nine of you!” in an instant they were in it, and then he buckled it up and threw it into a corner. after this all was suddenly quiet, and brother lustig lay down again, and slept till it was bright day. then came the inn-keeper, and the nobleman to whom the castle belonged, to see how he had fared; but when they perceived that he was merry and well they were astonished, and asked, “have the spirits done you no harm, then?” “the reason why they have not,” answered brother lustig, “is because i have got the whole nine of them in my knapsack! you may once more inhabit your castle quite tranquilly, none of them will ever haunt it again.” the nobleman thanked him, made him rich presents, and begged him to remain in his service, and he would provide for him as long as he lived. “no,”
replied brother lustig, “i am used to wandering about, i will travel farther.” then he went away, and entered into a smithy, laid the knapsack, which contained the nine devils on the anvil, and asked the smith and his apprentices to strike it. so they smote with their great hammers with all their strength, and the devils uttered howls which were quite pitiable. when he opened the knapsack after this, eight of them were dead, but one which had been lying in a fold of it, was still alive, slipped out, and went back again to hell. thereupon brother lustig travelled a long time about the world, and those who know them can tell many a story about him, but at last he grew old, and thought of his end, so he went to a hermit who was known to be a pious man, and said to him, “i am tired of wandering about, and want now to behave in such a manner that i shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.” the hermit replied, “there are two roads, one is broad and pleasant, and leads to hell, the other is narrow and rough, and leads to heaven.” “i should be a fool,” thought brother lustig, “if i were to take the narrow, rough road.” so he set out and took the broad and pleasant road, and at length came to a great black door, which was the door of hell. brother lustig knocked, and the door-keeper peeped out to see who was there. but when he saw brother lustig, he was terrified, for he was the very same ninth devil who had been shut up in the knapsack, and had escaped from it with a black eye. so he pushed the bolt in again as quickly as he could, ran to the devil’s lieutenant, and said, “there is a fellow outside with a knapsack, who wants to come in, but as you value your lives don’t allow him to enter, or he will wish the whole of hell into his knapsack. he once gave me a frightful hammering when i was inside it.” so they called out to brother lustig that he was to go away again, for he should not get in there! “if they won’t have me here,” thought he, “i will see if i can find a place for myself in heaven, for i must be somewhere.” so he turned about and went onwards until he came to the door of heaven, where he knocked. st. peter was sitting hard by as door-keeper. brother lustig recognised him at once, and thought, “here i find an old friend, i shall get on better.” but st. peter said, “i really believe that thou wantest to come into heaven.” “let me in, brother; i must get in somewhere; if they would have taken me into hell, i should not have come here.” “no,” said st.
peter, “thou shalt not enter.” “then if thou wilt not let me in, take thy knapsack back, for i will have nothing at all from thee.” “give it here, then,” said st. peter. then brother lustig gave him the knapsack into heaven through the bars, and st. peter took it, and hung it beside his seat. then said brother lustig, “and now i wish myself inside my knapsack,” and in a second he was in it, and in heaven, and st. peter was forced to let him stay there.
82 gambling hansel
once upon a time there was a man who did nothing but gamble, and for that reason people never called him anything but gambling hansel, and as he never ceased to gamble, he played away his house and all that he had. now the very day before his creditors were to take his house from him, came the lord and st. peter, and asked him to give them shelter for the night. then gambling hansel said, “for my part, you may stay the night, but i cannot give you a bed or anything to eat.” so the lord said he was just to take them in, and they themselves would buy something to eat, to which gambling hansel made no objection. thereupon st. peter gave him three groschen, and said he was to go to the baker’s and fetch some bread. so gambling hansel went, but when he reached the house where the other gambling vagabonds were gathered together, they, although they had won all that he had, greeted him clamorously, and said, “hansel, do come in.” “oh,” said he, “do you want to win the three groschen too?” on this they would not let him go. so he went in, and played away the three groschen also. meanwhile st. peter and the lord were waiting, and as he was so long in coming, they set out to meet him. when gambling hansel came, however, he pretended that the money had fallen into the gutter, and kept raking about in it all the while to find it, but our lord already knew that he had lost it in play. st. peter again gave him three groschen, and now he did not allow himself to be led away once more, but fetched them the loaf. our lord then inquired if he had no wine, and he said, “alack, sir, the casks are all empty!” but the lord said he was to go down into the cellar, for the best wine was still there. for a long time he would not believe this, but at length he said, “well, i will go down, but i know that there is none there.” when he turned the tap, however, lo and behold, the best of wine ran out! so he took it to them, and the two passed the night there. early next day our lord told gambling hansel that he might beg three favours. the lord expected that he would ask to go to heaven; but gambling hansel asked for a pack of cards with which he could win everything, for dice with which he would win everything, and for a tree whereon every kind of fruit would grow, and from which no one who had climbed up, could descend until he bade him do so. the lord gave him all that he had asked, and departed with st. peter.
and now gambling hansel at once set about gambling in real earnest, and before long he had gained half the world. upon this st. peter said to the lord, “lord, this thing must not go on, he will win, and thou lose, the whole world. we must send death to him.” when death appeared, gambling hansel had just seated himself at the gaming-table, and death said, “hansel, come out a while.” but gambling hansel said, “just wait a little until the game is done, and in the meantime get up into that tree out there, and gather a little fruit that we may have something to munch on our way.” thereupon death climbed up, but when he wanted to come down again, he could not, and gambling hansel left him up there for seven years, during which time no one died.
so st. peter said to the lord, “lord, this thing must not go on. people no longer die; we must go ourselves.” and they went themselves, and the lord commanded hansel to let death come down. so hansel went at once to death and said to him, “come down,” and death took him directly and put an end to him. they went away together and came to the next world, and then gambling hansel made straight for the door of heaven, and knocked at it. “who is there?” “gambling hansel.” “ah, we will have nothing to do with him! begone!” so he went to the door of purgatory, and knocked once more. “who is there?” “gambling hansel.” “ah, there is quite enough weeping and wailing here without him. we do not want to gamble, just go away again.” then he went to the door of hell, and there they let him in. there was, however, no one at home but old lucifer and the crooked devils who had just been doing their evil work in the world.
and no sooner was hansel there than he sat down to gamble again.
lucifer, however, had nothing to lose, but his mis-shapen devils, and gambling hansel won them from him, as with his cards he could not fail to do. and now he was off again with his crooked devils, and they went to hohenfuert and pulled up a hop-pole, and with it went to heaven and began to thrust the pole against it, and heaven began to crack. so again st. peter said, “lord, this thing cannot go on, we must let him in, or he will throw us down from heaven.” and they let him in. but gambling hansel instantly began to play again, and there was such a noise and confusion that there was no hearing what they themselves were saying. therefore st. peter once more said, “lord, this cannot go on, we must throw him down, or he will make all heaven rebellious.” so they went to him at once, and threw him down, and his soul broke into fragments, and went into the gambling vagabonds who are living this very day.
83 hans in luck
hans had served his master for seven years, so he said to him, “master, my time is up; now i should be glad to go back home to my mother; give me my wages.” the master answered, “you have served me faithfully and honestly; as the service was so shall the reward be;” and he gave hans a piece of gold as big as his head. hans pulled his handkerchief out of his pocket, wrapped up the lump in it, put it on his shoulder, and set out on the way home.
as he went on, always putting one foot before the other, he saw a horseman trotting quickly and merrily by on a lively horse. “ah!” said hans quite loud, “what a fine thing it is to ride! there you sit as on a chair; you stumble over no stones, you save your shoes, and get on, you don’t know how.”
the rider, who had heard him, stopped and called out, “hollo! hans, why do you go on foot, then?”
“i must,” answered he, “for i have this lump to carry home; it is true that it is gold, but i cannot hold my head straight for it, and it hurts my shoulder.”
“i will tell you what,” said the rider, “we will exchange: i will give you my horse, and you can give me your lump.”
“with all my heart,” said hans, “but i can tell you, you will have to crawl along with it.”
the rider got down, took the gold, and helped hans up; then gave him the bridle tight in his hands and said, “if you want to go at a really good pace, you must click your tongue and call out, “jup! jup!”
hans was heartily delighted as he sat upon the horse and rode away so bold and free. after a little while he thought that it ought to go faster, and he began to click with his tongue and call out, “jup! jup!”
the horse put himself into a sharp trot, and before hans knew where he was, he was thrown off and lying in a ditch which separated the field from the highway. the horse would have gone off too if it had not been stopped by a countryman, who was coming along the road and driving a cow before him.
hans got his limbs together and stood up on his legs again, but he was vexed, and said to the countryman, “it is a poor joke, this riding, especially when one gets hold of a mare like this, that kicks and throws one off, so that one has a chance of breaking one’s neck. never again will i mount it. now i like your cow, for one can walk quietly behind her, and have, over and above, one’s milk, butter and cheese every day without fail. what would i not give to have such a cow.”
“well,” said the countryman, “if it would give you so much pleasure, i do not mind giving the cow for the horse.” hans agreed with the greatest delight; the countryman jumped upon the horse, and rode quickly away.
hans drove his cow quietly before him, and thought over his lucky bargain. “if only i have a morsel of bread—and that can hardly fail me—i can eat butter and cheese with it as often as i like; if i am thirsty, i can milk my cow and drink the milk. good heart, what more can i want?”
when he came to an inn he made a halt, and in his great content ate up what he had with him—his dinner and supper—and all he had, and with his last few farthings had half a glass of beer. then he drove his cow onwards along the road to his mother’s village.
as it drew nearer mid-day, the heat was more oppressive, and hans found himself upon a moor which it took about an hour to cross. he felt it very hot and his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth with thirst. “i can find a cure for this,” thought hans; “i will milk the cow now and refresh myself with the milk.” he tied her to a withered tree, and as he had no pail he put his leather cap underneath; but try as he would, not a drop of milk came. and as he set himself to work in a clumsy way, the impatient beast at last gave him such a blow on his head with its hind foot, that he fell on the ground, and for a long time could not think where he was.
by good fortune a butcher just then came along the road with a wheel-barrow, in which lay a young pig. “what sort of a trick is this?”
cried he, and helped the good hans up. hans told him what had happened.
the butcher gave him his flask and said, “take a drink and refresh yourself. the cow will certainly give no milk, it is an old beast; at the best it is only fit for the plough, or for the butcher.” “well, well,” said hans, as he stroked his hair down on his head, “who would have thought it? certainly it is a fine thing when one can kill a beast like that at home; what meat one has! but i do not care much for beef, it is not juicy enough for me. a young pig like that now is the thing to have, it tastes quite different; and then there are the sausages!”
“hark ye, hans,” said the butcher, “out of love for you i will exchange, and will let you have the pig for the cow.” “heaven repay you for your kindness!” said hans as he gave up the cow, whilst the pig was unbound from the barrow, and the cord by which it was tied was put in his hand.
hans went on, and thought to himself how everything was going just as he wished; if he did meet with any vexation it was immediately set right. presently there joined him a lad who was carrying a fine white goose under his arm. they said good morning to each other, and hans began to tell of his good luck, and how he had always made such good bargains. the boy told him that he was taking the goose to a christening-feast. “just lift her,” added he, and laid hold of her by the wings; “how heavy she is—she has been fattened up for the last eight weeks. whoever has a bit of her when she is roasted will have to wipe the fat from both sides of his mouth.” “yes,” said hans, as he weighed her in one hand, “she is a good weight, but my pig is no bad one.”
meanwhile the lad looked suspiciously from one side to the other, and shook his head. “look here,” he said at length, “it may not be all right with your pig. in the village through which i passed, the mayor himself had just had one stolen out of its sty. i fear—i fear that you have got hold of it there. they have sent out some people and it would be a bad business if they caught you with the pig; at the very least, you would be shut up in the dark hole.”
the good hans was terrified. “goodness!” he said, “help me out of this fix; you know more about this place than i do, take my pig and leave me your goose.” “i shall risk something at that game,” answered the lad, “but i will not be the cause of your getting into trouble.” so he took the cord in his hand, and drove away the pig quickly along a by-path.
the good hans, free from care, went homewards with the goose under his arm. “when i think over it properly,” said he to himself, “i have even gained by the exchange; first there is the good roast-meat, then the quantity of fat which will drip from it, and which will give me dripping for my bread for a quarter of a year, and lastly the beautiful white feathers; i will have my pillow stuffed with them, and then indeed i shall go to sleep without rocking. how glad my mother will be!”
as he was going through the last village, there stood a scissors-grinder with his barrow; as his wheel whirred he sang—
“i sharpen scissors and quickly grind, my coat blows out in the wind behind.”
hans stood still and looked at him; at last he spoke to him and said, “all’s well with you, as you are so merry with your grinding.” “yes,”
answered the scissors-grinder, “the trade has a golden foundation. a real grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his pocket finds gold in it. but where did you buy that fine goose?”
“i did not buy it, but exchanged my pig for it.”
“and the pig?”
“that i got for a cow.”
“and the cow?”
“i took that instead of a horse.”
“and the horse?”
“for that i gave a lump of gold as big as my head.”
“and the gold?”
“well, that was my wages for seven years’ service.”
“you have known how to look after yourself each time,” said the grinder. “if you can only get on so far as to hear the money jingle in your pocket whenever you stand up, you will have made your fortune.”
“how shall i manage that?” said hans. “you must be a grinder, as i am; nothing particular is wanted for it but a grindstone, the rest finds itself. i have one here; it is certainly a little worn, but you need not give me anything for it but your goose; will you do it?”
“how can you ask?” answered hans. “i shall be the luckiest fellow on earth; if i have money whenever i put my hand in my pocket, what need i trouble about any longer?” and he handed him the goose and received the grindstone in exchange. “now,” said the grinder, as he took up an ordinary heavy stone that lay by him, “here is a strong stone for you into the bargain; you can hammer well upon it, and straighten your old nails. take it with you and keep it carefully.”
hans loaded himself with the stones, and went on with a contented heart; his eyes shone with joy. “i must have been born with a caul,” he cried; “everything i want happens to me just as if i were a sunday-child.”
meanwhile, as he had been on his legs since daybreak, he began to feel tired. hunger also tormented him, for in his joy at the bargain by which he got the cow he had eaten up all his store of food at once. at last he could only go on with great trouble, and was forced to stop every minute; the stones, too, weighed him down dreadfully. then he could not help thinking how nice it would be if he had not to carry them just then.
he crept like a snail to a well in a field, and there he thought that he would rest and refresh himself with a cool draught of water, but in order that he might not injure the stones in sitting down, he laid them carefully by his side on the edge of the well. then he sat down on it, and was to stoop and drink, when he made a slip, pushed against the stones, and both of them fell into the water. when hans saw them with his own eyes sinking to the bottom, he jumped for joy, and then knelt down, and with tears in his eyes thanked god for having shown him this favour also, and delivered him in so good a way, and without his having any need to reproach himself, from those heavy stones which had been the only things that troubled him.
“there is no man under the sun so fortunate as i,” he cried out. with a light heart and free from every burden he now ran on until he was with his mother at home.
84 hans married
there was once upon a time a young peasant named hans, whose uncle wanted to find him a rich wife. he therefore seated hans behind the stove, and had it made very hot. then he fetched a pot of milk and plenty of white bread, gave him a bright newly-coined farthing in his hand, and said, “hans, hold that farthing fast, crumble the white bread into the milk, and stay where you are, and do not stir from that spot till i come back.” “yes,” said hans, “i will do all that.” then the wooer put on a pair of old patched trousers, went to a rich peasant’s daughter in the next village, and said, “won’t you marry my nephew hans—you will get an honest and sensible man who will suit you?” the covetous father asked, “how is it with regard to his means? has he bread to break?” “dear friend,” replied the wooer, “my young nephew has a snug berth, a nice bit of money in hand, and plenty of bread to break, besides he has quite as many patches as i have,” (and as he spoke, he slapped the patches on his trousers, but in that district small pieces of land were called patches also.) “if you will give yourself the trouble to go home with me, you shall see at once that all is as i have said.” then the miser did not want to lose this good opportunity, and said, “if that is the case, i have nothing further to say against the marriage.”
so the wedding was celebrated on the appointed day, and when the young wife went out of doors to see the bridegroom’s property, hans took off his sunday coat and put on his patched smock-frock and said, “i might spoil my good coat.” then together they went out and wherever a boundary line came in sight, or fields and meadows were divided from each other, hans pointed with his finger and then slapped either a large or a small patch on his smock-frock, and said, “that patch is mine, and that too, my dearest, just look at it,” meaning thereby that his wife should not stare at the broad land, but look at his garment, which was his own.
“were you indeed at the wedding?” “yes, indeed i was there, and in full dress. my head-dress was of snow; then the sun came out, and it was melted. my coat was of cobwebs, and i had to pass by some thorns which tore it off me, my shoes were of glass, and i pushed against a stone and they said, “klink,” and broke in two.
85 the gold-children
there was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little cottage, and who earned their bread by fishing, and always lived from hand to mouth. but it came to pass one day when the man was sitting by the water-side, and casting his net, that he drew out a fish entirely of gold. as he was looking at the fish, full of astonishment, it began to speak and said, “hark you, fisherman, if you will throw me back again into the water, i will change your little hut into a splendid castle.” then the fisherman answered, “of what use is a castle to me, if i have nothing to eat?” the gold fish continued, “that shall be taken care of, there will be a cupboard in the castle in which, when you open it, shall be dishes of the most delicate meats, and as many of them as you can desire.” “if that be true,” said the man, “then i can well do you a favour.” “yes,” said the fish, “there is, however, the condition that you shall disclose to no one in the world, whosoever he may be, whence your good luck has come, if you speak but one single word, all will be over.” then the man threw the wonderful fish back again into the water, and went home. but where his hovel had formerly stood, now stood a great castle. he opened wide his eyes, entered, and saw his wife dressed in beautiful clothes, sitting in a splendid room, and she was quite delighted, and said, “husband, how has all this come to pass? it suits me very well.” “yes,” said the man, “it suits me too, but i am frightfully hungry, just give me something to eat.” said the wife, “but i have got nothing and don’t know where to find anything in this new house.” “there is no need of your knowing,” said the man, “for i see yonder a great cupboard, just unlock it.” when she opened it, there stood cakes, meat, fruit, wine, quite a bright prospect.
then the woman cried joyfully, “what more can you want, my dear?” and they sat down, and ate and drank together. when they had had enough, the woman said, “but husband, whence come all these riches?” “alas,”
answered he, “do not question me about it, for i dare not tell you anything; if i disclose it to any one, then all our good fortune will fly.” “very good,” said she, “if i am not to know anything, then i do not want to know anything.” however, she was not in earnest; she never rested day or night, and she goaded her husband until in his impatience he revealed that all was owing to a wonderful golden fish which he had caught, and to which in return he had given its liberty. and as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with the cupboard immediately disappeared, they were once more in the old fisherman’s hut, and the man was obliged to follow his former trade and fish. but fortune would so have it, that he once more drew out the golden fish. “listen,” said the fish, “if you will throw me back into the water again, i will once more give you the castle with the cupboard full of roast and boiled meats; only be firm, for your life’s sake don’t reveal from whom you have it, or you will lose it all again!” “i will take good care,”
answered the fisherman, and threw the fish back into the water. now at home everything was once more in its former magnificence, and the wife was overjoyed at their good fortune, but curiosity left her no peace, so that after a couple of days she began to ask again how it had come to pass, and how he had managed to secure it. the man kept silence for a short time, but at last she made him so angry that he broke out, and betrayed the secret. in an instant the castle disappeared, and they were back again in their old hut. “now you have got what you want,”
said he; “and we can gnaw at a bare bone again.” “ah,” said the woman, “i had rather not have riches if i am not to know from whom they come, for then i have no peace.”
the man went back to fish, and after a while he chanced to draw out the gold fish for a third time. “listen,” said the fish, “i see very well that i am fated to fall into your hands, take me home and cut me into six pieces; give your wife two of them to eat, two to your horse and bury two of them in the ground, then they will bring you a blessing.”
the fisherman took the fish home with him, and did as it had bidden him. it came to pass, however, that from the two pieces that were buried in the ground two golden lilies sprang up, that the horse had two golden foals, and the fisherman’s wife bore two children who were made entirely of gold. the children grew up, became tall and handsome, and the lilies and horses grew likewise. then they said, “father, we want to mount our golden steeds and travel out in the world.” but he answered sorrowfully, “how shall i bear it if you go away, and i know not how it fares with you?” then they said, “the two golden lilies remain here. by them you can see how it is with us; if they are fresh, then we are in health; if they are withered, we are ill; if they perish, then we are dead.” so they rode forth and came to an inn, in which were many people, and when they perceived the gold-children they began to laugh, and jeer. when one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not go out into the world, but turned back and went home again to his father. but the other rode forward and reached a great forest. as he was about to enter it, the people said, it is not safe for you to ride through, the wood is full of robbers who would treat you badly. you will fare ill, and when they see that you are all of gold, and your horse likewise, they will assuredly kill you.’
but he would not allow himself to be frightened, and said, “i must and will ride through it.” then he took bear-skins and covered himself and his horse with them, so that the gold was no more to be seen, and rode fearlessly into the forest. when he had ridden onward a little he heard a rustling in the bushes, and heard voices speaking together. from one side came cries of, “there is one,” but from the other, “let him go, ’tis an idle fellow, as poor and bare as a church-mouse, what should we gain from him?”
so the gold-child rode joyfully through the forest, and no evil befell him. one day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden, who was so beautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than she existed in the world. and as such a mighty love took possession of him, he went up to her and said, “i love thee with my whole heart, wilt thou be my wife?” he, too, pleased the maiden so much that she agreed and said, “yes, i will be thy wife, and be true to thee my whole life long.” then they were married, and just as they were in the greatest happiness, home came the father of the bride, and when he saw that his daughter’s wedding was being celebrated, he was astonished, and said, “where is the bridegroom?” they showed him the gold-child, who, however, still wore his bear-skins. then the father said wrathfully, “a vagabond shall never have my daughter!” and was about to kill him. then the bride begged as hard as she could, and said, “he is my husband, and i love him with all my heart!” until at last he allowed himself to be appeased. nevertheless the idea never left his thoughts, so that next morning he rose early, wishing to see whether his daughter’s husband was a common ragged beggar. but when he peeped in, he saw a magnificent golden man in the bed, and the cast-off bear-skins lying on the ground.
then he went back and thought, “what a good thing it was that i restrained my anger! i should have committed a great crime.” but the gold-child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag, and when he awoke in the morning, he said to his wife, “i must go out hunting.”
she was uneasy, and begged him to stay there, and said, “you might easily meet with a great misfortune,” but he answered, “i must and will go.”
thereupon he got up, and rode forth into the forest, and it was not long before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to his dream. he aimed and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran away. he gave chase over hedges and ditches for the whole day without feeling tired, but in the evening the stag vanished from his sight, and when the gold-child looked round him, he was standing before a little house, wherein was a witch. he knocked, and a little old woman came out and asked, “what are you doing so late in the midst of the great forest?”
“have you not seen a stag?” “yes,” answered she, “i know the stag well,” and thereupon a little dog which had come out of the house with her, barked at the man violently. “wilt thou be silent, thou odious toad,” said he, “or i will shoot thee dead.” then the witch cried out in a passion, “what! will you slay my little dog?” and immediately transformed him, so that he lay like a stone, and his bride awaited him in vain and thought, “that which i so greatly dreaded, which lay so heavily on my heart, has come upon him!” but at home the other brother was standing by the gold-lilies, when one of them suddenly drooped.
“good heavens!” said he, “my brother has met with some great misfortune! i must away to see if i can possibly rescue him.” then the father said, “stay here, if i lose you also, what shall i do?” but he answered, “i must and will go forth!”
then he mounted his golden horse, and rode forth and entered the great forest, where his brother lay turned to stone. the old witch came out of her house and called him, wishing to entrap him also, but he did not go near her, and said, “i will shoot you, if you will not bring my brother to life again.” she touched the stone, though very unwillingly, with her forefinger, and he was immediately restored to his human shape. but the two gold-children rejoiced when they saw each other again, kissed and caressed each other, and rode away together out of the forest, the one home to his bride, and the other to his father. the father then said, “i knew well that you had rescued your brother, for the golden lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again.” then they lived happily, and all prospered with them until their death.
86 the fox and the geese
the fox once came to a meadow in which was a flock of fine fat geese, on which he smiled and said, “i come in the nick of time, you are sitting together quite beautifully, so that i can eat you up one after the other.” the geese cackled with terror, sprang up, and began to wail and beg piteously for their lives. but the fox would listen to nothing, and said, “there is no mercy to be had! you must die.” at length one of them took heart and said, “if we poor geese are to yield up our vigorous young lives, show us the only possible favour and allow us one more prayer, that we may not die in our sins, and then we will place ourselves in a row, so that you can always pick yourself out the fattest.” “yes,” said the fox, “that is reasonable, and a pious request. pray away, i will wait till you are done.” then the first began a good long prayer, for ever saying, “ga! ga!” and as she would make no end, the second did not wait until her turn came, but began also, “ga! ga!” the third and fourth followed her, and soon they were all cackling together.
when they have done praying, the story shall be continued further, but at present they are still praying without stopping.”
87 the poor man and the rich man
in olden times, when the lord himself still used to walk about on this earth amongst men, it once happened that he was tired and overtaken by the darkness before he could reach an inn. now there stood on the road before him two houses facing each other; the one large and beautiful, the other small and poor. the large one belonged to a rich man, and the small one to a poor man.
then the lord thought, “i shall be no burden to the rich man, i will stay the night with him.” when the rich man heard some one knocking at his door, he opened the window and asked the stranger what he wanted.
the lord answered, “i only ask for a night’s lodging.”
then the rich man looked at the traveler from head to foot, and as the lord was wearing common clothes, and did not look like one who had much money in his pocket, he shook his head, and said, “no, i cannot take you in, my rooms are full of herbs and seeds; and if i were to lodge everyone who knocked at my door, i might very soon go begging myself.
go somewhere else for a lodging,” and with this he shut down the window and left the lord standing there.
so the lord turned his back on the rich man, and went across to the small house and knocked. he had hardly done so when the poor man opened the little door and bade the traveler come in. “pass the night with me, it is already dark,” said he; “you cannot go any further to-night.”
this pleased the lord, and he went in. the poor man’s wife shook hands with him, and welcomed him, and said he was to make himself at home and put up with what they had got; they had not much to offer him, but what they had they would give him with all their hearts. then she put the potatoes on the fire, and while they were boiling, she milked the goat, that they might have a little milk with them. when the cloth was laid, the lord sat down with the man and his wife, and he enjoyed their coarse food, for there were happy faces at the table. when they had had supper and it was bed-time, the woman called her husband apart and said, “hark you, dear husband, let us make up a bed of straw for ourselves to-night, and then the poor traveler can sleep in our bed and have a good rest, for he has been walking the whole day through, and that makes one weary.” “with all my heart,” he answered, “i will go and offer it to him;” and he went to the stranger and invited him, if he had no objection, to sleep in their bed and rest his limbs properly.
but the lord was unwilling to take their bed from the two old folks; however, they would not be satisfied, until at length he did it and lay down in their bed, while they themselves lay on some straw on the ground.
next morning they got up before daybreak, and made as good a breakfast as they could for the guest. when the sun shone in through the little window, and the lord had got up, he again ate with them, and then prepared to set out on his journey.
but as he was standing at the door he turned round and said, “as you are so kind and good, you may wish three things for yourselves and i will grant them.” then the man said, “what else should i wish for but eternal happiness, and that we two, as long as we live, may be healthy and have every day our daily bread; for the third wish, i do not know what to have.” and the lord said to him, “will you wish for a new house instead of this old one?” “oh, yes,” said the man; “if i can have that, too, i should like it very much.” and the lord fulfilled his wish, and changed their old house into a new one, again gave them his blessing, and went on.
the sun was high when the rich man got up and leaned out of his window and saw, on the opposite side of the way, a new clean-looking house with red tiles and bright windows where the old hut used to be. he was very much astonished, and called his wife and said to her, “tell me, what can have happened? last night there was a miserable little hut standing there, and to-day there is a beautiful new house. run over and see how that has come to pass.”
so his wife went and asked the poor man, and he said to her, “yesterday evening a traveler came here and asked for a night’s lodging, and this morning when he took leave of us he granted us three wishes—eternal happiness, health during this life and our daily bread as well, and besides this, a beautiful new house instead of our old hut.”
when the rich man’s wife heard this, she ran back in haste and told her husband how it had happened. the man said, “i could tear myself to pieces! if i had but known that! that traveler came to our house too, and wanted to sleep here, and i sent him away.” “quick!” said his wife, “get on your horse. you can still catch the man up, and then you must ask to have three wishes granted to you.”
the rich man followed the good counsel and galloped away on his horse, and soon came up with the lord. he spoke to him softly and pleasantly, and begged him not to take it amiss that he had not let him in directly; he was looking for the front-door key, and in the meantime the stranger had gone away, if he returned the same way he must come and stay with him. “yes,” said the lord; “if i ever come back again, i will do so.” then the rich man asked if might not wish for three things too, as his neighbor had done? “yes,” said the lord, he might, but it would not be to his advantage, and he had better not wish for anything; but the rich man thought that he could easily ask for something which would add to his happiness, if he only knew that it would be granted.
so the lord said to him, “ride home, then, and three wishes which you shall form, shall be fulfilled.”
the rich man had now gained what he wanted, so he rode home, and began to consider what he should wish for. as he was thus thinking he let the bridle fall, and the horse began to caper about, so that he was continually disturbed in his meditations, and could not collect his thoughts at all. he patted its neck, and said, “gently, lisa,” but the horse only began new tricks. then at last he was angry, and cried quite impatiently, “i wish your neck was broken!” directly he had said the words, down the horse fell on the ground, and there it lay dead and never moved again. and thus was his first wish fulfilled. as he was miserly by nature, he did not like to leave the harness lying there; so he cut it off, and put it on his back; and now he had to go on foot. “i have still two wishes left,” said he, and comforted himself with that thought.
and now as he was walking slowly through the sand, and the sun was burning hot at noon-day, he grew quite hot-tempered and angry. the saddle hurt his back, and he had not yet any idea what to wish for. “if i were to wish for all the riches and treasures in the world,” said he to himself, “i should still to think of all kinds of other things later on, i know that, beforehand. but i will manage so that there is nothing at all left me to wish for afterwards.” then he sighed and said, “ah, if i were but that bavarian peasant, who likewise had three wishes granted to him, and knew quite well what to do, and in the first place wished for a great deal of beer, and in the second for as much beer as he was able to drink, and in the third for a barrel of beer into the bargain.”
many a time he thought he had found it, but then it seemed to him to be, after all, too little. then it came into his mind, what an easy life his wife had, for she stayed at home in a cool room and enjoyed herself. this really did vex him, and before he was aware, he said, “i just wish she was sitting there on this saddle, and could not get off it, instead of my having to drag it along on my back.” and as the last word was spoken, the saddle disappeared from his back, and he saw that his second wish had been fulfilled. then he really did feel warm. he began to run and wanted to be quite alone in his own room at home, to think of something really large for his last wish. but when he arrived there and opened the parlour-door, he saw his wife sitting in the middle of the room on the saddle, crying and complaining, and quite unable to get off it. so he said, “do bear it, and i will wish for all the riches on earth for thee, only stay where thou art.” she, however, called him a fool, and said, “what good will all the riches on earth do me, if i am to sit on this saddle? thou hast wished me on it, so thou must help me off.” so whether he would or not, he was forced to let his third wish be that she should be quit of the saddle, and able to get off it, and immediately the wish was fulfilled. so he got nothing by it but vexation, trouble, abuse, and the loss of his horse; but the poor people lived happily, quietly, and piously until their happy death.
88 the singing, springing lark
there was once on a time a man who was about to set out on a long journey, and on parting he asked his three daughters what he should bring back with him for them. whereupon the eldest wished for pearls, the second wished for diamonds, but the third said, “dear father, i should like a singing, soaring lark.” the father said, “yes, if i can get it, you shall have it,” kissed all three, and set out. now when the time had come for him to be on his way home again, he had brought pearls and diamonds for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for a singing, soaring lark for the youngest, and he was very unhappy about it, for she was his favorite child. then his road lay through a forest, and in the midst of it was a splendid castle, and near the castle stood a tree, but quite on the top of the tree, he saw a singing, soaring lark. “aha, you come just at the right moment!” he said, quite delighted, and called to his servant to climb up and catch the little creature. but as he approached the tree, a lion leapt from beneath it, shook himself, and roared till the leaves on the trees trembled. “he who tries to steal my singing, soaring lark,” he cried, “will i devour.” then the man said, “i did not know that the bird belonged to thee. i will make amends for the wrong i have done and ransom myself with a large sum of money, only spare my life.” the lion said, “nothing can save thee, unless thou wilt promise to give me for mine own what first meets thee on thy return home; and if thou wilt do that, i will grant thee thy life, and thou shalt have the bird for thy daughter, into the bargain.” but the man hesitated and said, “that might be my youngest daughter, she loves me best, and always runs to meet me on my return home.” the servant, however, was terrified and said, “why should your daughter be the very one to meet you, it might as easily be a cat, or dog?” then the man allowed himself to be over-persuaded, took the singing, soaring lark, and promised to give the lion whatsoever should first meet him on his return home.
when he reached home and entered his house, the first who met him was no other than his youngest and dearest daughter, who came running up, kissed and embraced him, and when she saw that he had brought with him a singing, soaring lark, she was beside herself with joy. the father, however, could not rejoice, but began to weep, and said, “my dearest child, i have bought the little bird dear. in return for it, i have been obliged to promise thee to a savage lion, and when he has thee he will tear thee in pieces and devour thee,” and he told her all, just as it had happened, and begged her not to go there, come what might. but she consoled him and said, “dearest father, indeed your promise must be fulfilled. i will go thither and soften the lion, so that i may return to thee safely.” next morning she had the road pointed out to her, took leave, and went fearlessly out into the forest. the lion, however, was an enchanted prince and was by day a lion, and all his people were lions with him, but in the night they resumed their natural human shapes. on her arrival she was kindly received and led into the castle.
when night came, the lion turned into a handsome man, and their wedding was celebrated with great magnificence. they lived happily together, remained awake at night, and slept in the daytime. one day he came and said, “to-morrow there is a feast in thy father’s house, because your eldest sister is to be married, and if thou art inclined to go there, my lions shall conduct thee.” she said, “yes, i should very much like to see my father again,” and went thither, accompanied by the lions.
there was great joy when she arrived, for they had all believed that she had been torn in pieces by the lion, and had long ceased to live.
but she told them what a handsome husband she had, and how well off she was, remained with them while the wedding-feast lasted, and then went back again to the forest. when the second daughter was about to be married, and she was again invited to the wedding, she said to the lion, “this time i will not be alone, thou must come with me.” the lion, however, said that it was too dangerous for him, for if when there a ray from a burning candle fell on him, he would be changed into a dove, and for seven years long would have to fly about with the doves. she said, “ah, but do come with me, i will take great care of thee, and guard thee from all light.” so they went away together, and took with them their little child as well. she had a chamber built there, so strong and thick that no ray could pierce through it; in this he was to shut himself up when the candles were lit for the wedding-feast. but the door was made of green wood which warped and left a little crack which no one noticed. the wedding was celebrated with magnificence, but when the procession with all its candles and torches came back from church, and passed by this apartment, a ray about the breadth of a hair fell on the king’s son, and when this ray touched him, he was transformed in an instant, and when she came in and looked for him, she did not see him, but a white dove was sitting there. the dove said to her, “for seven years must i fly about the world, but at every seventh step that you take i will let fall a drop of red blood and a white feather, and these will show thee the way, and if thou followest the trace thou canst release me.” thereupon the dove flew out at the door, and she followed him, and at every seventh step a red drop of blood and a little white feather fell down and showed her the way.
so she went continually further and further in the wide world, never looking about her or resting, and the seven years were almost past; then she rejoiced and thought that they would soon be delivered, and yet they were so far from it! once when they were thus moving onwards, no little feather and no drop of red blood fell, and when she raised her eyes the dove had disappeared. and as she thought to herself, “in this no man can help thee,” she climbed up to the sun, and said to him, “thou shinest into every crevice, and over every peak, hast thou not seen a white dove flying?” “no,” said the sun, “i have seen none, but i present thee with a casket, open it when thou art in sorest need.” then she thanked the sun, and went on until evening came and the moon appeared; she then asked her, “thou shinest the whole night through, and on every field and forest, hast thou not seen a white dove flying?”
“no,” said the moon, “i have seen no dove, but here i give thee an egg, break it when thou art in great need.” she thanked the moon, and went on until the night wind came up and blew on her, then she said to it, “thou blowest over every tree and under every leaf, hast thou not seen a white dove flying?” “no,” said the night wind, “i have seen none, but i will ask the three other winds, perhaps they have seen it.” the east wind and the west wind came, and had seen nothing, but the south wind said, “i have seen the white dove, it has flown to the red sea, where it has become a lion again, for the seven years are over, and the lion is there fighting with a dragon; the dragon, however, is an enchanted princess.” the night wind then said to her, “i will advise thee; go to the red sea, on the right bank are some tall reeds, count them, break off the eleventh, and strike the dragon with it, then the lion will be able to subdue it, and both then will regain their human form. after that, look round and thou wilt see the griffin which is by the red sea; swing thyself, with thy beloved, on to his back, and the bird will carry you over the sea to your own home. here is a nut for thee, when thou are above the center of the sea, let the nut fall, it will immediately shoot up, and a tall nut-tree will grow out of the water on which the griffin may rest; for if he cannot rest, he will not be strong enough to carry you across, and if thou forgettest to throw down the nut, he will let you fall into the sea.”
then she went thither, and found everything as the night wind had said.
she counted the reeds by the sea, and cut off the eleventh, struck the dragon therewith, whereupon the lion overcame it, and immediately both of them regained their human shapes. but when the princess, who had before been the dragon, was delivered from enchantment, she took the youth by the arm, seated herself on the griffin, and carried him off with her. there stood the poor maiden who had wandered so far and was again forsaken. she sat down and cried, but at last she took courage and said, “still i will go as far as the wind blows and as long as the cock crows, until i find him,” and she went forth by long, long roads, until at last she came to the castle where both of them were living together; there she heard that soon a feast was to be held, in which they would celebrate their wedding, but she said, “god still helps me,”
and opened the casket that the sun had given her. a dress lay therein as brilliant as the sun itself. so she took it out and put it on, and went up into the castle, and everyone, even the bride herself, looked at her with astonishment. the dress pleased the bride so well that she thought it might do for her wedding-dress, and asked if it was for sale? “not for money or land,” answered she, “but for flesh and blood.”
the bride asked her what she meant by that, so she said, “let me sleep a night in the chamber where the bridegroom sleeps.” the bride would not, yet wanted very much to have the dress; at last she consented, but the page was to give the prince a sleeping-draught. when it was night, therefore, and the youth was already asleep, she was led into the chamber; she seated herself on the bed and said, “i have followed after thee for seven years. i have been to the sun and the moon, and the four winds, and have enquired for thee, and have helped thee against the dragon; wilt thou, then quite forget me?” but the prince slept so soundly that it only seemed to him as if the wind were whistling outside in the fir-trees. when therefore day broke, she was led out again, and had to give up the golden dress. and as that even had been of no avail, she was sad, went out into a meadow, sat down there, and wept. while she was sitting there, she thought of the egg which the moon had given her; she opened it, and there came out a clucking hen with twelve chickens all of gold, and they ran about chirping, and crept again under the old hen’s wings; nothing more beautiful was ever seen in the world! then she arose, and drove them through the meadow before her, until the bride looked out of the window. the little chickens pleased her so much that she immediately came down and asked if they were for sale. “not for money or land, but for flesh and blood; let me sleep another night in the chamber where the bridegroom sleeps.”
the bride said, “yes,” intending to cheat her as on the former evening.
but when the prince went to bed he asked the page what the murmuring and rustling in the night had been? on this the page told all; that he had been forced to give him a sleeping-draught, because a poor girl had slept secretly in the chamber, and that he was to give him another that night. the prince said, “pour out the draught by the bed-side.” at night, she was again led in, and when she began to relate how ill all had fared with her, he immediately recognized his beloved wife by her voice, sprang up and cried, “now i really am released! i have been as it were in a dream, for the strange princess has bewitched me so that i have been compelled to forget thee, but god has delivered me from the spell at the right time.” then they both left the castle secretly in the night, for they feared the father of the princess, who was a sorcerer, and they seated themselves on the griffin which bore them across the red sea, and when they were in the midst of it, she let fall the nut. immediately a tall nut-tree grew up, whereon the bird rested, and then carried them home, where they found their child, who had grown tall and beautiful, and they lived thenceforth happily until their death.
89 the goose-girl
there was once upon a time an old queen whose husband had been dead for many years, and she had a beautiful daughter. when the princess grew up she was betrothed to a prince who lived at a great distance. when the time came for her to be married, and she had to journey forth into the distant kingdom, the aged queen packed up for her many costly vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets also of gold and silver; and cups and jewels, in short, everything which appertained to a royal dowry, for she loved her child with all her heart. she likewise sent her maid in waiting, who was to ride with her, and hand her over to the bridegroom, and each had a horse for the journey, but the horse of the king’s daughter was called falada, and could speak. so when the hour of parting had come, the aged mother went into her bedroom, took a small knife and cut her finger with it until it bled, then she held a white handkerchief to it into which she let three drops of blood fall, gave it to her daughter and said, “dear child, preserve this carefully, it will be of service to you on your way.”
so they took a sorrowful leave of each other; the princess put the piece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went away to her bridegroom. after she had ridden for a while she felt a burning thirst, and said to her waiting-maid, “dismount, and take my cup which thou hast brought with thee for me, and get me some water from the stream, for i should like to drink.” “if you are thirsty,” said the waiting-maid, “get off your horse yourself, and lie down and drink out of the water, i don’t choose to be your servant.” so in her great thirst the princess alighted, bent down over the water in the stream and drank, and was not allowed to drink out of the golden cup. then she said, “ah, heaven!” and the three drops of blood answered, “if thy mother knew, her heart would break.” but the king’s daughter was humble, said nothing, and mounted her horse again. she rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun scorched her, and she was thirsty once more, and when they came to a stream of water, she again cried to her waiting-maid, “dismount, and give me some water in my golden cup,” for she had long ago forgotten the girl’s ill words. but the waiting-maid said still more haughtily, “if you wish to drink, drink as you can, i don’t choose to be your maid.” then in her great thirst the king’s daughter alighted, bent over the flowing stream, wept and said, “ah, heaven!” and the drops of blood again replied, “if thy mother knew this, her heart would break.” and as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, the handkerchief with the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom, and floated away with the water without her observing it, so great was her trouble. the waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and she rejoiced to think that she had now power over the bride, for since the princess had lost the drops of blood, she had become weak and powerless. so now when she wanted to mount her horse again, the one that was called falada, the waiting-maid said, “falada is more suitable for me, and my nag will do for thee” and the princess had to be content with that. then the waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade the princess exchange her royal apparel for her own shabby clothes; and at length she was compelled to swear by the clear sky above her, that she would not say one word of this to any one at the royal court, and if she had not taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot. but falada saw all this, and observed it well.
the waiting-maid now mounted falada, and the true bride the bad horse, and thus they traveled onwards, until at length they entered the royal palace. there were great rejoicings over her arrival, and the prince sprang forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid from her horse, and thought she was his consort. she was conducted upstairs, but the real princess was left standing below. then the old king looked out of the window and saw her standing in the courtyard, and how dainty and delicate and beautiful she was, and instantly went to the royal apartment, and asked the bride about the girl she had with her who was standing down below in the courtyard, and who she was? “i picked her up on my way for a companion; give the girl something to work at, that she may not stand idle.” but the old king had no work for her, and knew of none, so he said, “i have a little boy who tends the geese, she may help him.” the boy was called conrad, and the true bride had to help him to tend the geese. soon afterwards the false bride said to the young king, “dearest husband, i beg you to do me a favour.” he answered, “i will do so most willingly.” “then send for the knacker, and have the head of the horse on which i rode here cut off, for it vexed me on the way.” in reality, she was afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to the king’s daughter. then she succeeded in making the king promise that it should be done, and the faithful falada was to die; this came to the ears of the real princess, and she secretly promised to pay the knacker a piece of gold if he would perform a small service for her. there was a great dark-looking gateway in the town, through which morning and evening she had to pass with the geese: would he be so good as to nail up falada’s head on it, so that she might see him again, more than once. the knacker’s man promised to do that, and cut off the head, and nailed it fast beneath the dark gateway.
early in the morning, when she and conrad drove out their flock beneath this gateway, she said in passing,
“alas, falada, hanging there!”
then the head answered,
“alas, young queen, how ill you fare!
if this your tender mother knew, her heart would surely break in two.”
then they went still further out of the town, and drove their geese into the country. and when they had come to the meadow, she sat down and unbound her hair which was like pure gold, and conrad saw it and delighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck out a few hairs. then she said,
“blow, blow, thou gentle wind, i say, blow conrad’s little hat away, and make him chase it here and there, until i have braided all my hair, and bound it up again.”
and there came such a violent wind that it blew conrad’s hat far away across country, and he was forced to run after it. when he came back she had finished combing her hair and was putting it up again, and he could not get any of it. then conrad was angry, and would not speak to her, and thus they watched the geese until the evening, and then they went home.
next day when they were driving the geese out through the dark gateway, the maiden said,
“alas, falada, hanging there!”
falada answered,
“alas, young queen, how ill you fare!
if this your tender mother knew, her heart would surely break in two.”
and she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her hair, and conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste,
“blow, blow, thou gentle wind, i say, blow conrad’s little hat away, and make him chase it here and there, until i have braided all my hair, and bound it up again.”
then the wind blew, and blew his little hat off his head and far away, and conrad was forced to run after it, and when he came back, her hair had been put up a long time, and he could get none of it, and so they looked after their geese till evening came.
but in the evening after they had got home, conrad went to the old king, and said, “i won’t tend the geese with that girl any longer!”
“why not?” inquired the aged king. “oh, because she vexes me the whole day long.” then the aged king commanded him to relate what it was that she did to him. and conrad said, “in the morning when we pass beneath the dark gateway with the flock, there is a sorry horse’s head on the wall, and she says to it,
“alas, falada, hanging there!”
and the head replies,
“alas, young queen how ill you fare!
if this your tender mother knew, her heart would surely break in two.”
and conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose pasture, and how when there he had to chase his hat.
the aged king commanded him to drive his flock out again next day, and as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the dark gateway, and heard how the maiden spoke to the head of falada, and then he too went into the country, and hid himself in the thicket in the meadow. there he soon saw with his own eyes the goose-girl and the goose-boy bringing their flock, and how after a while she sat down and unplaited her hair, which shone with radiance. and soon she said,
“blow, blow, thou gentle wind, i say, blow conrad’s little hat away, and make him chase it here and there, until i have braided all my hair, and bound it up again.”
then came a blast of wind and carried off conrad’s hat, so that he had to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing and plaiting her hair, all of which the king observed. then, quite unseen, he went away, and when the goose-girl came home in the evening, he called her aside, and asked why she did all these things. “i may not tell you that, and i dare not lament my sorrows to any human being, for i have sworn not to do so by the heaven which is above me; if i had not done that, i should have lost my life.” he urged her and left her no peace, but he could draw nothing from her. then said he, “if thou wilt not tell me anything, tell thy sorrows to the iron-stove there,” and he went away. then she crept into the iron-stove, and began to weep and lament, and emptied her whole heart, and said, “here am i deserted by the whole world, and yet i am a king’s daughter, and a false waiting-maid has by force brought me to such a pass that i have been compelled to put off my royal apparel, and she has taken my place with my bridegroom, and i have to perform menial service as a goose-girl. if my mother did but know that, her heart would break.”
the aged king, however, was standing outside by the pipe of the stove, and was listening to what she said, and heard it. then he came back again, and bade her come out of the stove. and royal garments were placed on her, and it was marvellous how beautiful she was! the aged king summoned his son, and revealed to him that he had got the false bride who was only a waiting-maid, but that the true one was standing there, as the sometime goose-girl. the young king rejoiced with all his heart when he saw her beauty and youth, and a great feast was made ready to which all the people and all good friends were invited. at the head of the table sat the bridegroom with the king’s daughter at one side of him, and the waiting-maid on the other, but the waiting-maid was blinded, and did not recognize the princess in her dazzling array.
when they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the aged king asked the waiting-maid as a riddle, what a person deserved who had behaved in such and such a way to her master, and at the same time related the whole story, and asked what sentence such an one merited? then the false bride said, “she deserves no better fate than to be stripped entirely naked, and put in a barrel which is studded inside with pointed nails, and two white horses should be harnessed to it, which will drag her along through one street after another, till she is dead.” “it is thou,” said the aged king, “and thou hast pronounced thine own sentence, and thus shall it be done unto thee.” and when the sentence had been carried out, the young king married his true bride, and both of them reigned over their kingdom in peace and happiness.
90 the young giant
once on a time a countryman had a son who was as big as a thumb, and did not become any bigger, and during several years did not grow one hair’s breadth. once when the father was going out to plough, the little one said, “father, i will go out with you.” “thou wouldst go out with me?” said the father. “stay here, thou wilt be of no use out there, besides thou mightest get lost!” then thumbling began to cry, and for the sake of peace his father put him in his pocket, and took him with him. when he was outside in the field, he took him out again, and set him in a freshly-cut furrow. whilst he was there, a great giant came over the hill. “do thou see that great bogie?” said the father, for he wanted to frighten the little fellow to make him good; “he is coming to fetch thee.” the giant, however, had scarcely taken two steps with his long legs before he was in the furrow. he took up little thumbling carefully with two fingers, examined him, and without saying one word went away with him. his father stood by, but could not utter a sound for terror, and he thought nothing else but that his child was lost, and that as long as he lived he should never set eyes on him again.
the giant, however, carried him home, suckled him, and thumbling grew and became tall and strong after the manner of giants. when two years had passed, the old giant took him into the forest, wanted to try him, and said, “pull up a stick for thyself.” then the boy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree out of the earth by the roots. but the giant thought, “we must do better than that,” took him back again, and suckled him two years longer. when he tried him, his strength had increased so much that he could tear an old tree out of the ground.
that was still not enough for the giant; he again suckled him for two years, and when he then went with him into the forest and said, “now just tear up a proper stick for me,” the boy tore up the strongest oak-tree from the earth, so that it split, and that was a mere trifle to him. “now that will do,” said the giant, “thou art perfect,” and took him back to the field from whence he had brought him. his father was there following the plough. the young giant went up to him, and said, “does my father see what a fine man his son has grown into?”
the farmer was alarmed, and said, “no, thou art not my son; i don’t want thee leave me!” “truly i am your son; allow me to do your work, i can plough as well as you, nay better.” “no, no, thou art not my son; and thou canst not plough go away!” however, as he was afraid of this great man, he left go of the plough, stepped back and stood at one side of the piece of land. then the youth took the plough, and just pressed it with one hand, but his grasp was so strong that the plough went deep into the earth. the farmer could not bear to see that, and called to him, “if thou art determined to plough, thou must not press so hard on it, that makes bad work.” the youth, however, unharnessed the horses, and drew the plough himself, saying, “just go home, father, and bid my mother make ready a large dish of food, and in the meantime i will go over the field.” then the farmer went home, and ordered his wife to prepare the food; but the youth ploughed the field which was two acres large, quite alone, and then he harnessed himself to the harrow, and harrowed the whole of the land, using two harrows at once. when he had done it, he went into the forest, and pulled up two oak-trees, laid them across his shoulders, and hung on them one harrow behind and one before, and also one horse behind and one before, and carried all as if it had been a bundle of straw, to his parents’ house. when he entered the yard, his mother did not recognize him, and asked, “who is that horrible tall man?” the farmer said, “that is our son.” she said, “no that cannot be our son, we never had such a tall one, ours was a little thing.” she called to him, “go away, we do not want thee!” the youth was silent, but led his horses to the stable, gave them some oats and hay, and all that they wanted. when he had done this, he went into the parlour, sat down on the bench and said, “mother, now i should like something to eat, will it soon be ready?” then she said, “yes,” and brought in two immense dishes full of food, which would have been enough to satisfy herself and her husband for a week. the youth, however, ate the whole of it himself, and asked if she had nothing more to set before him. “no,” she replied, “that is all we have.” “but that was only a taste, i must have more.” she did not dare to oppose him, and went and put a huge caldron full of food on the fire, and when it was ready, carried it in. “at length come a few crumbs,” said he, and ate all there was, but it was still not sufficient to appease his hunger. then said he, “father, i see well that with you i shall never have food enough; if you will get me an iron staff which is strong, and which i cannot break against my knees, i will go out into the world.”
the farmer was glad, put his two horses in his cart, and fetched from the smith a staff so large and thick, that the two horses could only just bring it away. the youth laid it across his knees, and snap! he broke it in two in the middle like a bean-stalk, and threw it away. the father then harnessed four horses, and brought a bar which was so long and thick, that the four horses could only just drag it. the son snapped this also in twain against his knees, threw it away, and said, “father, this can be of no use to me, you must harness more horses, and bring a stronger staff.” so the father harnessed eight horses, and brought one which was so long and thick, that the eight horses could only just carry it. when the son took it in his hand, he broke off a bit from the top of it also, and said, “father, i see that you will not be able to procure me any such staff as i want, i will remain no longer with you.”
so he went away, and gave out that he was a smith’s apprentice. he arrived at a village, wherein lived a smith who was a greedy fellow, who never did a kindness to any one, but wanted everything for himself.
the youth went into the smithy and asked if he needed a journeyman.
“yes,” said the smith, and looked at him, and thought, “that is a strong fellow who will strike out well, and earn his bread.” so he asked, “how much wages dost thou want?” “i don’t want any at all,” he replied, “only every fortnight, when the other journeymen are paid, i will give thee two blows, and thou must bear them.” the miser was heartily satisfied, and thought he would thus save much money. next morning, the strange journeyman was to begin to work, but when the master brought the glowing bar, and the youth struck his first blow, the iron flew asunder, and the anvil sank so deep into the earth, that there was no bringing it out again. then the miser grew angry, and said, “oh, but i can’t make any use of you, you strike far too powerfully; what will you have for the one blow?”
then said he, “i will only give you quite a small blow, that’s all.”
and he raised his foot, and gave him such a kick that he flew away over four loads of hay. then he sought out the thickest iron bar in the smithy for himself, took it as a stick in his hand and went onwards.
when he had walked for some time, he came to a small farm, and asked the bailiff if he did not require a head-servant. “yes,” said the bailiff, “i can make use of one; you look a strong fellow who can do something, how much a year do you want as wages?” he again replied that he wanted no wages at all, but that every year he would give him three blows, which he must bear. then the bailiff was satisfied, for he, too, was a covetous fellow. next morning all the servants were to go into the wood, and the others were already up, but the head-servant was still in bed. then one of them called to him, “get up, it is time; we are going into the wood, and thou must go with us.” “ah,” said he quite roughly and surlily, “you may just go, then; i shall be back again before any of you.” then the others went to the bailiff, and told him that the head-man was still lying in bed, and would not go into the wood with them. the bailiff said they were to awaken him again, and tell him to harness the horses. the head-man, however, said as before, “just go there, i shall be back again before any of you.” and then he stayed in bed two hours longer. at length he arose from the feathers, but first he got himself two bushels of peas from the loft, made himself some broth with them, ate it at his leisure, and when that was done, went and harnessed the horses, and drove into the wood. not far from the wood was a ravine through which he had to pass, so he first drove the horses on, and then stopped them, and went behind the cart, took trees and brushwood, and made a great barricade, so that no horse could get through. when he was entering the wood, the others were just driving out of it with their loaded carts to go home; then said he to them, “drive on, i will still get home before you do.” he did not drive far into the wood, but at once tore two of the very largest trees of all out of the earth, threw them on his cart, and turned round. when he came to the barricade, the others were still standing there, not able to get through. “don’t you see,” said he, “that if you had stayed with me, you would have got home just as quickly, and would have had another hour’s sleep?” he now wanted to drive on, but his horses could not work their way through, so he unharnessed them, laid them on the top of the cart, took the shafts in his own hands, and pulled it all through, and he did this just as easily as if it had been laden with feathers. when he was over, he said to the others, “there, you see, i have got over quicker than you,” and drove on, and the others had to stay where they were. in the yard, however, he took a tree in his hand, showed it to the bailiff, and said, “isn’t that a fine bundle of wood?” then said the bailiff to his wife, “the servant is a good one, if he does sleep long, he is still home before the others.” so he served the bailiff for a year, and when that was over, and the other servants were getting their wages, he said it was time for him to take his too. the bailiff, however, was afraid of the blows which he was to receive, and earnestly entreated him to excuse him from having them; for rather than that, he himself would be head-servant, and the youth should be bailiff. “no,”
said he, “i will not be a bailiff, i am head-servant, and will remain so, but i will administer that which we agreed on.” the bailiff was willing to give him whatsoever he demanded, but it was of no use, the head-servant said no to everything. then the bailiff did not know what to do, and begged for a fortnight’s delay, for he wanted to find some way of escape. the head-servant consented to this delay. the bailiff summoned all his clerks together, and they were to think the matter over, and give him advice. the clerks pondered for a long time, but at last they said that no one was sure of his life with the head-servant, for he could kill a man as easily as a midge, and that the bailiff ought to make him get into the well and clean it, and when he was down below, they would roll up one of the mill-stones which was lying there, and throw it on his head; and then he would never return to daylight.
the advice pleased the bailiff, and the head-servant was quite willing to go down the well. when he was standing down below at the bottom, they rolled down the largest mill-stone and thought they had broken his skull, but he cried, “chase away those hens from the well, they are scratching in the sand up there, and throwing the grains into my eyes, so that i can’t see.” so the bailiff cried, “sh-sh,” and pretended to frighten the hens away. when the head-servant had finished his work, he climbed up and said, “just look what a beautiful neck-tie i have on,”
and behold it was the mill-stone which he was wearing round his neck.
the head-servant now wanted to take his reward, but the bailiff again begged for a fortnight’s delay. the clerks met together and advised him to send the head-servant to the haunted mill to grind corn by night, for from thence as yet no man had ever returned in the morning alive.
the proposal pleased the bailiff, he called the head-servant that very evening, and ordered him to take eight bushels of corn to the mill, and grind it that night, for it was wanted. so the head-servant went to the loft, and put two bushels in his right pocket, and two in his left, and took four in a wallet, half on his back, and half on his breast, and thus laden went to the haunted mill. the miller told him that he could grind there very well by day, but not by night, for the mill was haunted, and that up to the present time whosoever had gone into it at night had been found in the morning lying dead inside. he said, “i will manage it, just you go away to bed.” then he went into the mill, and poured out the corn. about eleven o’clock he went into the miller’s room, and sat down on the bench. when he had sat there a while, a door suddenly opened, and a large table came in, and on the table, wine and roasted meats placed themselves, and much good food besides, but everything came of itself, for no one was there to carry it. after this the chairs pushed themselves up, but no people came, until all at once he beheld fingers, which handled knives and forks, and laid food on the plates, but with this exception he saw nothing. as he was hungry, and saw the food, he, too, place himself at the table, ate with those who were eating and enjoyed it. when he had had enough, and the others also had quite emptied their dishes, he distinctly heard all the candles being suddenly snuffed out, and as it was now pitch dark, he felt something like a box on the ear. then he said, “if anything of that kind comes again, i shall strike out in return.” and when he had received a second box on the ear, he, too struck out. and so it continued the whole night. he took nothing without returning it, but repaid everything with interest, and did not lay about him in vain. at daybreak, however, everything ceased. when the miller had got up, he wanted to look after him, and wondered if he were still alive. then the youth said, “i have eaten my fill, have received some boxes on the ears, but i have given some in return.” the miller rejoiced, and said that the mill was now released from the spell, and wanted to give him much money as a reward. but he said, “money, i will not have, i have enough of it.” so he took his meal on his back, went home, and told the bailiff that he had done what he had been told to do, and would now have the reward agreed on. when the bailiff heard that, he was seriously alarmed and quite beside himself; he walked backwards and forwards in the room, and drops of perspiration ran down from his forehead. then he opened the window to get some fresh air, but before he was aware, the head-servant had given him such a kick that he flew through the window out into the air, and so far away that no one ever saw him again. then said the head-servant to the bailiff’s wife, “if he does not come back, you must take the other blow.” she cried, “no, no i cannot bear it,” and opened the other window, because drops of perspiration were running down her forehead. then he gave her such a kick that she, too, flew out, and as she was lighter she went much higher than her husband. her husband cried, “do come to me,” but she replied, “come thou to me, i cannot come to thee.” and they hovered about there in the air, and could not get to each other, and whether they are still hovering about, or not, i do not know, but the young giant took up his iron bar, and went on his way.
91 the gnome
there was once upon a time a rich king who had three daughters, who daily went to walk in the palace garden, and the king was a great lover of all kinds of fine trees, but there was one for which he had such an affection, that if anyone gathered an apple from it he wished him a hundred fathoms underground. and when harvest time came, the apples on this tree were all as red as blood. the three daughters went every day beneath the tree, and looked to see if the wind had not blown down an apple, but they never by any chance found one, and the tree was so loaded with them that it was almost breaking, and the branches hung down to the ground. then the king’s youngest child had a great desire for an apple, and said to her sisters, “our father loves us far too much to wish us underground, it is my belief that he would only do that to people who were strangers.” and while she was speaking, the child plucked off quite a large apple, and ran to her sisters, saying, “just taste, my dear little sisters, for never in my life have i tasted anything so delightful.” then the two other sisters also ate some of the apple, whereupon all three sank deep down into the earth, where they could hear no cock crow.
when mid-day came, the king wished to call them to come to dinner, but they were nowhere to be found. he sought them everywhere in the palace and garden, but could not find them. then he was much troubled, and made known to the whole land that whosoever brought his daughters back again should have one of them to wife. hereupon so many young men went about the country in search, that there was no counting them, for every one loved the three children because they were so kind to all, and so fair of face. three young huntsmen also went out, and when they had travelled about for eight days, they arrived at a great castle, in which were beautiful apartments, and in one room a table was laid on which were delicate dishes which were still so warm that they were smoking, but in the whole of the castle no human being was either to be seen or heard. they waited there for half a day, and the food still remained warm and smoking, and at length they were so hungry that they sat down and ate, and agreed with each other that they would stay and live in that castle, and that one of them, who should be chosen by casting lots, should remain in the house, and the two others seek the king’s daughters. they cast lots, and the lot fell on the eldest; so next day the two younger went out to seek, and the eldest had to stay home. at mid-day came a small, small mannikin and begged for a piece of bread, then the huntsman took the bread which he had found there, and cut a round off the loaf and was about to give it to him, but whilst he was giving it to the mannikin, the latter let it fall, and asked the huntsman to be so good as to give him that piece again. the huntsman was about to do so and stooped, on which the mannikin took a stick, seized him by the hair, and gave him a good beating. next day, the second stayed at home, and he fared no better. when the two others returned in the evening, the eldest said, “well, how have you got on?”
“oh, very badly,” said he, and then they lamented their misfortune together, but they said nothing about it to the youngest, for they did not like him at all, and always called him stupid hans, because he did not exactly belong to the forest. on the third day, the youngest stayed at home, and again the little mannikin came and begged for a piece of bread. when the youth gave it to him, the elf let it fall as before, and asked him to be so good as to give him that piece again. then said hans to the little mannikin, “what! canst thou not pick up that piece thyself? if thou wilt not take as much trouble as that for thy daily bread, thou dost not deserve to have it.” then the mannikin grew very angry and said he was to do it, but the huntsman would not, and took my dear mannikin, and gave him a thorough beating. then the mannikin screamed terribly, and cried, “stop, stop, and let me go, and i will tell thee where the king’s daughters are.” when hans heard that, he left off beating him and the mannikin told him that he was an earth mannikin, and that there were more than a thousand like him, and that if he would go with him he would show him where the king’s daughters were. then he showed him a deep well, but there was no water in it. and the elf said that he knew well that the companions hans had with him did not intend to deal honourably with him, therefore if he wished to deliver the king’s children, he must do it alone. the two other brothers would also be very glad to recover the king’s daughters, but they did not want to have any trouble or danger. hans was therefore to take a large basket, and he must seat himself in it with his hanger and a bell, and be let down. below were three rooms, and in each of them was a princess, with a many-headed dragon, whose heads she was to comb and trim, but he must cut them off. and having said all this, the elf vanished. when it was evening the two brothers came and asked how he had got on, and he said, “pretty well so far,” and that he had seen no one except at mid-day when a little mannikin had come and begged for a piece of bread, that he had given some to him, but that the mannikin had let it fall and had asked him to pick it up again; but as he did not choose to do that, the elf had begun to lose his temper, and that he had done what he ought not, and had given the elf a beating, on which he had told him where the king’s daughters were. then the two were so angry at this that they grew green and yellow. next morning they went to the well together, and drew lots who should first seat himself in the basket, and again the lot fell on the eldest, and he was to seat himself in it, and take the bell with him. then he said, “if i ring, you must draw me up again immediately.” when he had gone down for a short distance, he rang, and they at once drew him up again. then the second seated himself in the basket, but he did just the same as the first, and then it was the turn of the youngest, but he let himself be lowered quite to the bottom. when he had got out of the basket, he took his hanger, and went and stood outside the first door and listened, and heard the dragon snoring quite loudly. he opened the door slowly, and one of the princesses was sitting there, and had nine dragon’s heads lying upon her lap, and was combing them. then he took his hanger and hewed at them, and the nine fell off. the princess sprang up, threw her arms round his neck, embraced and kissed him repeatedly, and took her stomacher, which was made of pure gold, and hung it round his neck.
then he went to the second princess, who had a dragon with five heads to comb, and delivered her also, and to the youngest, who had a dragon with four heads, he went likewise. and they all rejoiced, and embraced him and kissed him without stopping. then he rang very loud, so that those above heard him, and he placed the princesses one after the other in the basket, and had them all drawn up, but when it came to his own turn he remembered the words of the elf, who had told him that his comrades did not mean well by him. so he took a great stone which was lying there, and placed it in the basket, and when it was about half way up, his false brothers above cut the rope, so that the basket with the stone fell to the ground, and they thought that he was dead, and ran away with the three princesses, making them promise to tell their father that it was they who had delivered them, and then they went to the king, and each demanded a princess in marriage.
in the meantime the youngest huntsman was wandering about the three chambers in great trouble, fully expecting to have to end his days there, when he saw, hanging on the wall, a flute; then said he, “why dost thou hang there, no one can be merry here?” he looked at the dragons, heads likewise and said, “you too cannot help me now.” he walked backwards and forwards for such a long time that he made the surface of the ground quite smooth. but at last other thoughts came to his mind, and he took the flute from the wall, and played a few notes on it, and suddenly a number of elves appeared, and with every note that he sounded one more came. then he played until the room was entirely filled. they all asked what he desired, so he said he wished to get above ground back to daylight, on which they seized him by every hair that grew on his head, and thus they flew with him onto the earth again. when he was above ground, he at once went to the king’s palace, just as the wedding of one princess was about to be celebrated, and he went to the room where the king and his three daughters were. when the princesses saw him they fainted. hereupon the king was angry, and ordered him to be put in prison at once, because he thought he must have done some injury to the children. when the princesses came to themselves, however, they entreated the king to set him free again. the king asked why, and they said that they were not allowed to tell that, but their father said that they were to tell it to the stove. and he went out, listened at the door, and heard everything. then he caused the two brothers to be hanged on the gallows, and to the third he gave his youngest daughter, and on that occasion i wore a pair of glass shoes, and i struck them against a stone, and they said, “klink,” and were broken.
92 the king of the golden mountain
there was a certain merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl; they were both young, and could not walk. and two richly-laden ships of his sailed forth to sea with all his property on board, and just as he was expecting to win much money by them, news came that they had gone to the bottom, and now instead of being a rich man he was a poor one, and had nothing left but one field outside the town. in order to drive his misfortune a little out of his thoughts, he went out to this field, and as he was walking forwards and backwards in it, a little black mannikin stood suddenly by his side, and asked why he was so sad, and what he was taking so much to heart. then said the merchant, “if thou couldst help me i would willingly tell thee.” “who knows?” replied the black dwarf. “perhaps, i can help thee.” then the merchant told him that all he possessed had gone to the bottom of the sea, and that he had nothing left but this field. “do not trouble thyself,” said the dwarf. “if thou wilt promise to give me the first thing that rubs itself against thy leg when thou art at home again, and to bring it here to this place in twelve years’ time, thou shalt have as much money as thou wilt.” the merchant thought, “what can that be but my dog?” and did not remember his little boy, so he said yes, gave the black man a written and sealed promise, and went home.
when he reached home, his little boy was so delighted that he held by a bench, tottered up to him and seized him fast by the legs. the father was shocked, for he remembered his promise, and now knew what he had pledged himself to do; as however, he still found no money in his chest, he thought the dwarf had only been jesting. a month afterwards he went up to the garret, intending to gather together some old tin and to sell it, and saw a great heap of money lying. then he was happy again, made purchases, became a greater merchant than before, and felt that this world was well-governed. in the meantime the boy grew tall, and at the same time sharp and clever. but the nearer the twelfth year approached the more anxious grew the merchant, so that his distress might be seen in his face. one day his son asked what ailed him, but the father would not say. the boy, however, persisted so long, that at last he told him that without being aware of what he was doing, he had promised him to a black dwarf, and had received much money for doing so. he said likewise that he had set his hand and seal to this, and that now when twelve years had gone by he would have to give him up.
then said the son, “oh, father, do not be uneasy, all will go well. the black man has no power over me.” the son had himself blessed by the priest, and when the time came, father and son went together to the field, and the son made a circle and placed himself inside it with his father. then came the black dwarf and said to the old man, “hast thou brought with thee that which thou hast promised me?” he was silent, but the son asked, “what dost thou want here?” then said the black dwarf, “i have to speak with thy father, and not with thee.” the son replied, “thou hast betrayed and misled my father, give back the writing.” “no,”
said the black dwarf, “i will not give up my rights.” they spoke together for a long time after this, but at last they agreed that the son, as he did not belong to the enemy of mankind, nor yet to his father, should seat himself in a small boat, which should lie on water which was flowing away from them, and that the father should push it off with his own foot, and then the son should remain given up to the water. so he took leave of his father, placed himself in a little boat, and the father had to push it off with his own foot. the boat capsized so that the keel was uppermost, and the father believed his son was lost, and went home and mourned for him.
the boat, however, did not sink, but floated quietly away, and the boy sat safely inside it, and it floated thus for a long time, until at last it stopped by an unknown shore. then he landed and saw a beautiful castle before him, and set out to go to it. but when he entered it, he found that it was bewitched. he went through every room, but all were empty until he reached the last, where a snake lay coiled in a ring.
the snake, however, was an enchanted maiden, who rejoiced to see him, and said, “hast thou come, oh, my deliverer? i have already waited twelve years for thee; this kingdom is bewitched, and thou must set it free.” “how can i do that?” he inquired. “to-night come twelve black men, covered with chains who will ask what thou art doing here; keep silent; give them no answer, and let them do what they will with thee; they will torment thee, beat thee, stab thee; let everything pass, only do not speak; at twelve o’clock, they must go away again. on the second night twelve others will come; on the third, four-and-twenty, who will cut off thy head, but at twelve o’clock their power will be over, and then if thou hast endured all, and hast not spoken the slightest word, i shall be released. i will come to thee, and will have, in a bottle, some of the water of life. i will rub thee with that, and then thou wilt come to life again, and be as healthy as before.” then said he, “i will gladly set thee free.” and everything happened just as she had said; the black men could not force a single word from him, and on the third night the snake became a beautiful princess, who came with the water of life and brought him back to life again. so she threw herself into his arms and kissed him, and there was joy and gladness in the whole castle. after this their marriage was celebrated, and he was king of the golden mountain.
they lived very happily together, and the queen bore a fine boy. eight years had already gone by, when the king bethought him of his father; his heart was moved, and he wished to visit him. the queen, however, would not let him go away, and said, “i know beforehand that it will cause my unhappiness;” but he suffered her to have no rest until she consented. at their parting she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, “take this ring and put it on thy finger, and then thou wilt immediately be transported whithersoever thou wouldst be, only thou must promise me not to use it in wishing me away from this place and with thy father.” that he promised her, put the ring on his finger, and wished himself at home, just outside the town where his father lived.
instantly he found himself there, and made for the town, but when he came to the gate, the sentries would not let him in, because he wore such strange and yet such rich and magnificent clothing. then he went to a hill where a shepherd was watching his sheep, changed clothes with him, put on his old shepherd’s-coat, and then entered the town without hindrance. when he came to his father, he made himself known to him, but he did not at all believe that the shepherd was his son, and said he certainly had had a son, but that he was dead long ago; however, as he saw he was a poor, needy shepherd, he would give him something to eat. then the shepherd said to his parents, “i am verily your son. do you know of no mark on my body by which you could recognize me?” “yes,”
said his mother, “our son had a raspberry mark under his right arm.” he slipped back his shirt, and they saw the raspberry under his right arm, and no longer doubted that he was their son. then he told them that he was king of the golden mountain, and a king’s daughter was his wife, and that they had a fine son of seven years old. then said the father, “that is certainly not true; it is a fine kind of a king who goes about in a ragged shepherd’s-coat.” on this the son fell in a passion, and without thinking of his promise, turned his ring round, and wished both his wife and child with him. they were there in a second, but the queen wept, and reproached him, and said that he had broken his word, and had brought misfortune upon her. he said, “i have done it thoughtlessly, and not with evil intention,” and tried to calm her, and she pretended to believe this; but she had mischief in her mind.
then he led her out of the town into the field, and showed her the stream where the little boat had been pushed off, and then he said, “i am tired; sit down, i will sleep awhile on thy lap.” and he laid his head on her lap, and fell asleep. when he was asleep, she first drew the ring from his finger, then she drew away the foot which was under him, leaving only the slipper behind her, and she took her child in her arms, and wished herself back in her own kingdom. when he awoke, there he lay quite deserted, and his wife and child were gone, and so was the ring from his finger, the slipper only was still there as a token.
“home to thy parents thou canst not return,” thought he, “they would say that thou wast a wizard; thou must be off, and walk on until thou arrivest in thine own kingdom.” so he went away and came at length to a hill by which three giants were standing, disputing with each other because they did not know how to divide their father’s property. when they saw him passing by, they called to him and said little men had quick wits, and that he was to divide their inheritance for them. the inheritance, however, consisted of a sword, which had this property that if any one took it in his hand, and said, “all heads off but mine,” every head would lie on the ground; secondly, of a cloak which made any one who put it on invisible; thirdly, of a pair of boots which could transport the wearer to any place he wished in a moment. he said, “give me the three things that i may see if they are still in good condition.” they gave him the cloak, and when he had put it on, he was invisible and changed into a fly. then he resumed his own form and said, “the cloak is a good one, now give me the sword.” they said, “no, we will not give thee that; if thou were to say, all heads off but mine,’ all our heads would be off, and thou alone wouldst be left with thine.” nevertheless they gave it to him with the condition that he was only to try it against a tree. this he did, and the sword cut in two the trunk of a tree as if it had been a blade of straw. then he wanted to have the boots likewise, but they said, “no, we will not give them; if thou hadst them on thy feet and wert to wish thyself at the top of the hill, we should be left down here with nothing.” “oh, no,” said he, “i will not do that.” so they gave him the boots as well. and now when he had got all these things, he thought of nothing but his wife and his child, and said as though to himself, “oh, if i were but on the golden mountain,” and at the same moment he vanished from the sight of the giants, and thus their inheritance was divided. when he was near his palace, he heard sounds of joy, and fiddles, and flutes, and the people told him that his wife was celebrating her wedding with another. then he fell into a rage, and said, “false woman, she betrayed and deserted me whilst i was asleep!” so he put on his cloak, and unseen by all went into the palace. when he entered the dining-hall a great table was spread with delicious food, and the guests were eating and drinking, and laughing, and jesting. she sat on a royal seat in the midst of them in splendid apparel, with a crown on her head. he placed himself behind her, and no one saw him. when she put a piece of meat on a plate for herself, he took it away and ate it, and when she poured out a glass of wine for herself, he took it away and drank it. she was always helping herself to something, and yet she never got anything, for plate and glass disappeared immediately. then dismayed and ashamed, she arose and went to her chamber and wept, but he followed her there. she said, “has the devil power over me, or did my deliverer never come?” then he struck her in the face, and said, “did thy deliverer never come? it is he who has thee in his power, thou traitor. have i deserved this from thee?” then he made himself visible, went into the hall, and cried, “the wedding is at an end, the true king has returned.” the kings, princes, and councillors who were assembled there, ridiculed and mocked him, but he did not trouble to answer them, and said, “will you go away, or not?” on this they tried to seize him and pressed upon him, but he drew his sword and said, “all heads off but mine,” and all the heads rolled on the ground, and he alone was master, and once more king of the golden mountain.
93 the raven
there was once upon a time a queen who had a little daughter who was still so young that she had to be carried. one day the child was naughty, and the mother might say what she liked, but the child would not be quiet. then she became impatient, and as the ravens were flying about the palace, she opened the window and said, “i wish you were a raven and would fly away, and then i should have some rest.” scarcely had she spoken the words, before the child was changed into a raven, and flew from her arms out of the window. it flew into a dark forest, and stayed in it a long time, and the parents heard nothing of their child. then one day a man was on his way through this forest and heard the raven crying, and followed the voice, and when he came nearer, the bird said, “i am a king’s daughter by birth, and am bewitched, but thou canst set me free.” “what am i to do,” asked he. she said, “go further into the forest, and thou wilt find a house, wherein sits an aged woman, who will offer thee meat and drink, but you must accept nothing, for if you eatest and drinkest anything, thou wilt fall into a sleep, and then thou wilt not be able to deliver me. in the garden behind the house there is a great heap of tan, and on this thou shalt stand and wait for me. for three days i will come every afternoon at two o’clock in a carriage. on the first day four white horses will be harnessed to it, then four chestnut horses, and lastly four black ones; but if thou art not awake, but sleeping, i shall not be set free.” the man promised to do everything that she desired, but the raven said, alas, “i know already that thou wilt not deliver me; thou wilt accept something from the woman.” then the man once more promised that he would certainly not touch anything either to eat or to drink. but when he entered the house the old woman came to him and said, “poor man, how faint you are; come and refresh yourself; eat and drink.” “no,” said the man, “i will not eat or drink.” she, however, let him have no peace, and said, “if you will not eat, take one drink out of the glass; one is nothing.” then he let himself be persuaded, and drank. shortly before two o’clock in the afternoon he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven. as he was standing there, his weariness all at once became so great that he could not struggle against it, and lay down for a short time, but he was determined not to go to sleep. hardly, however, had he lain down, than his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell asleep and slept so soundly that nothing in the world could have aroused him.
at two o’clock the raven came driving up with four white horses, but she was already in deep grief and said, “i know he is asleep.” and when she came into the garden, he was indeed lying there asleep on the heap of tan. she alighted from the carriage, went to him, shook him, and called him, but he did not awake. next day about noon, the old woman came again and brought him food and drink, but he would not take any of it. but she let him have no rest and persuaded him until at length he again took one drink out of the glass. towards two o’clock he went into the garden to the tan heap to wait for the raven, but all at once felt such a great weariness that his limbs would no longer support him. he could not help himself, and was forced to lie down, and fell into a heavy sleep. when the raven drove up with four brown horses, she was already full of grief, and said, “i know he is asleep.” she went to him, but there he lay sleeping, and there was no wakening him. next day the old woman asked what was the meaning of this? he was neither eating nor drinking anything; did he want to die? he replied, “i am not allowed to eat or drink, and will not do so.” but she set a dish with food, and a glass with wine before him, and when he smelt it he could not resist, and swallowed a deep draught. when the time came, he went out into the garden to the heap of tan, and waited for the king’s daughter; but he became still more weary than on the day before, and lay down and slept as soundly as if he had been a stone. at two o’clock the raven came with four black horses, and the coachman and everything else was black. she was already in the deepest grief, and said, “i know that he is asleep and cannot deliver me.” when she came to him, there he was lying fast asleep. she shook him and called him, but she could not waken him. then she laid a loaf beside him, and after that a piece of meat, and thirdly a bottle of wine, and he might consume as much of all of them as he liked, but they would never grow less. after this she took a gold ring from her finger, and put it on his, and her name was graven on it. lastly, she laid a letter beside him wherein was written what she had given him, and that none of the things would ever grow less; and in it was also written, “i see right well that here you will never be able to deliver me, but if thou art still willing to deliver me, come to the golden castle of stromberg; it lies in thy power, of that i am certain.” and when she had given him all these things, she seated herself in her carriage, and drove to the golden castle of stromberg.
when the man awoke and saw that he had slept, he was sad at heart, and said, “she has certainly driven by, and i have not set her free.” then he perceived the things which were lying beside him, and read the letter wherein was written how everything had happened. so he arose and went away, intending to go to the golden castle of stromberg, but he did not know where it was. after he had walked about the world for a long time, he entered into a dark forest, and walked for fourteen days, and still could not find his way out. then it was once more evening, and he was so tired that he lay down in a thicket and fell asleep. next day he went onwards, and in the evening, as he was again about to lie down beneath some bushes, he heard such a howling and crying that he could not go to sleep. and at the time when people light the candles, he saw one glimmering, and arose and went towards it. then he came to a house which seemed very small, for in front of it a great giant was standing. he thought to himself, “if i go in, and the giant sees me, it will very likely cost me my life.”
at length he ventured it and went in. when the giant saw him, he said, “it is well that thou comest, for it is long since i have eaten; i will at once eat thee for my supper.” “i’d rather you would leave that alone,” said the man, “i do not like to be eaten; but if thou hast any desire to eat, i have quite enough here to satisfy thee.” “if that be true,” said the giant, “thou mayst be easy, i was only going to devour thee because i had nothing else.” then they went, and sat down to the table, and the man took out the bread, wine, and meat which would never come to an end. “this pleases me well,” said the giant, and ate to his heart’s content. then the man said to him, “canst thou tell me where the golden castle of stromberg is?” the giant said, “i will look at my map; all the towns, and villages, and houses are to be found on it.” he brought out the map which he had in the room and looked for the castle, but it was not to be found on it. “it’s no matter!” said he, “i have some still larger maps in my cupboard upstairs, and we will look in them.” but there, too, it was in vain. the man now wanted to go onwards, but the giant begged him to wait a few days longer until his brother, who had gone out to bring some provisions, came home. when the brother came home they inquired about the golden castle of stromberg.
he replied, “when i have eaten and have had enough, i will look in the map.” then he went with them up to his chamber, and they searched in his map, but could not find it. then he brought out still older maps, and they never rested until they found the golden castle of stromberg, but it was many thousand miles away. “how am i to get there?” asked the man. the giant said, “i have two hours’ time, during which i will carry you into the neighbourhood, but after that i must be at home to suckle the child that we have.” so the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues from the castle, and said, “thou canst very well walk the rest of the way alone.” and he turned back, but the man went onwards day and night, until at length he came to the golden castle of stromberg. it stood on a glass-mountain, and the bewitched maiden drove in her carriage round the castle, and then went inside it. he rejoiced when he saw her and wanted to climb up to her, but when he began to do so he always slipped down the glass again. and when he saw that he could not reach her, he was filled with trouble, and said to himself, “i will stay down here below, and wait for her.” so he built himself a hut and stayed in it for a whole year, and every day saw the king’s daughter driving about above, but never could go to her. then one day he saw from his hut three robbers who were beating each other, and cried to them, “god be with ye!” they stopped when they heard the cry, but as they saw no one, they once more began to beat each other, and that too most dangerously. so he again cried, “god be with ye!” again they stopped, looked round about, but as they saw no one they went on beating each other. then he cried for the third time, “god be with ye,”
and thought, “i must see what these three are about,” and went thither and asked why they were beating each other so furiously. one of them said that he found a stick, and that when he struck a door with it, that door would spring open. the next said that he had found a mantle, and that whenever he put it on, he was invisible, but the third said he had found a horse on which a man could ride everywhere, even up the glass-mountain. and now they did not know whether they ought to have these things in common, or whether they ought to divide them. then the man said, “i will give you something in exchange for these three things. money indeed have i not, but i have other things of more value; but first i must try yours to see if you have told the truth.” then they put him on the horse, threw the mantle round him, and gave him the stick in his hand, and when he had all these things they were no longer able to see him. so he gave them some vigorous blows and cried, “now, vagabonds, you have got what you deserve, are you satisfied?” and he rode up the glass-mountain, but when he came in front of the castle at the top, it was shut. then he struck the door with his stick, and it sprang open immediately. he went in and ascended the stairs until he came to the hall where the maiden was sitting with a golden cup full of wine before her. she, however, could not see him because he had the mantle on. and when he came up to her, he drew from his finger the ring which she had given him, and threw it into the cup so that it rang.
then she cried, “that is my ring, so the man who is to set me free must be here.” they searched the whole castle and did not find him, but he had gone out, and had seated himself on the horse and thrown off the mantle. when they came to the door, they saw him and cried aloud in their delight.* then he alighted and took the king’s daughter in his arms, but she kissed him and said, “now hast thou set me free, and to-morrow we will celebrate our wedding.”
94 the peasant’s wise daughter
there was once a poor peasant who had no land, but only a small house, and one daughter. then said the daughter, “we ought to ask our lord the king for a bit of newly-cleared land.” when the king heard of their poverty, he presented them with a piece of land, which she and her father dug up, and intended to sow with a little corn and grain of that kind. when they had dug nearly the whole of the field, they found in the earth a mortar made of pure gold. “listen,” said the father to the girl, “as our lord the king has been so gracious and presented us with the field, we ought to give him this mortar in return for it.” the daughter, however, would not consent to this, and said, “father, if we have the mortar without having the pestle as well, we shall have to get the pestle, so you had much better say nothing about it.” he would, however, not obey her, but took the mortar and carried it to the king, said that he had found it in the cleared land, and asked if he would accept it as a present. the king took the mortar, and asked if he had found nothing besides that? “no,” answered the countryman. then the king said that he must now bring him the pestle. the peasant said they had not found that, but he might just as well have spoken to the wind; he was put in prison, and was to stay there until he produced the pestle. the servants had daily to carry him bread and water, which is what people get in prison, and they heard how the man cried out continually, “ah! if i had but listened to my daughter! alas, alas, if i had but listened to my daughter!” and would neither eat nor drink. so he commanded the servants to bring the prisoner before him, and then the king asked the peasant why he was always crying, “ah! if i had but listened to my daughter!” and what it was that his daughter had said.
“she told me that i ought not to take the mortar to you, for i should have to produce the pestle as well.” “if you have a daughter who is as wise as that, let her come here.” she was therefore obliged to appear before the king, who asked her if she really was so wise, and said he would set her a riddle, and if she could guess that, he would marry her. she at once said yes, she would guess it. then said the king, “come to me not clothed, not naked, not riding, not walking, not in the road, and not out of the road, and if thou canst do that i will marry thee.” so she went away, put off everything she had on, and then she was not clothed, and took a great fishing net, and seated herself in it and wrapped it entirely round and round her, so that she was not naked, and she hired an ass, and tied the fisherman’s net to its tail, so that it was forced to drag her along, and that was neither riding nor walking. the ass had also to drag her in the ruts, so that she only touched the ground with her great toe, and that was neither being in the road nor out of the road. and when she arrived in that fashion, the king said she had guessed the riddle and fulfilled all the conditions.
then he ordered her father to be released from the prison, took her to wife, and gave into her care all the royal possessions.
now when some years had passed, the king was once drawing up his troops on parade, when it happened that some peasants who had been selling wood stopped with their waggons before the palace; some of them had oxen yoked to them, and some horses. there was one peasant who had three horses, one of which was delivered of a young foal, and it ran away and lay down between two oxen which were in front of the waggon.
when the peasants came together, they began to dispute, to beat each other and make a disturbance, and the peasant with the oxen wanted to keep the foal, and said one of the oxen had given birth to it, and the other said his horse had had it, and that it was his. the quarrel came before the king, and he give the verdict that the foal should stay where it had been found, and so the peasant with the oxen, to whom it did not belong, got it. then the other went away, and wept and lamented over his foal. now he had heard how gracious his lady the queen was because she herself had sprung from poor peasant folks, so he went to her and begged her to see if she could not help him to get his foal back again. said she, “yes, i will tell you what to do, if thou wilt promise me not to betray me. early to-morrow morning, when the king parades the guard, place thyself there in the middle of the road by which he must pass, take a great fishing-net and pretend to be fishing; go on fishing, too, and empty out the net as if thou hadst got it full”
and then she told him also what he was to say if he was questioned by the king. the next day, therefore, the peasant stood there, and fished on dry ground. when the king passed by, and saw that, he sent his messenger to ask what the stupid man was about? he answered, “i am fishing.” the messenger asked how he could fish when there was no water there? the peasant said, “it is as easy for me to fish on dry land as it is for an ox to have a foal.” the messenger went back and took the answer to the king, who ordered the peasant to be brought to him and told him that this was not his own idea, and he wanted to know whose it was? the peasant must confess this at once. the peasant, however, would not do so, and said always, god forbid he should! the idea was his own.
they laid him, however, on a heap of straw, and beat him and tormented him so long that at last he admitted that he had got the idea from the queen.
when the king reached home again, he said to his wife, “why hast thou behaved so falsely to me? i will not have thee any longer for a wife; thy time is up, go back to the place from whence thou camest to thy peasant’s hut.” one favour, however, he granted her; she might take with her the one thing that was dearest and best in her eyes; and thus was she dismissed. she said, “yes, my dear husband, if you command this, i will do it,” and she embraced him and kissed him, and said she would take leave of him. then she ordered a powerful sleeping draught to be brought, to drink farewell to him; the king took a long draught, but she took only a little. he soon fell into a deep sleep, and when she perceived that, she called a servant and took a fair white linen cloth and wrapped the king in it, and the servant was forced to carry him into a carriage that stood before the door, and she drove with him to her own little house. she laid him in her own little bed, and he slept one day and one night without awakening, and when he awoke he looked round and said, “good god! where am i?” he called his attendants, but none of them were there. at length his wife came to his bedside and said, “my dear lord and king, you told me i might bring away with me from the palace that which was dearest and most precious in my eyes i have nothing more precious and dear than yourself, so i have brought you with me.” tears rose to the king’s eyes and he said, “dear wife, thou shalt be mine and i will be thine,” and he took her back with him to the royal palace and was married again to her, and at the present time they are very likely still living.
95 old hildebrand
once upon a time lived a peasant and his wife, and the parson of the village had a fancy for the wife, and had wished for a long while to spend a whole day happily with her. the peasant woman, too, was quite willing. one day, therefore, he said to the woman, “listen, my dear friend, i have now thought of a way by which we can for once spend a whole day happily together. i’ll tell you what; on wednesday, you must take to your bed, and tell your husband you are ill, and if you only complain and act being ill properly, and go on doing so until sunday when i have to preach, i will then say in my sermon that whosoever has at home a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick brother or whosoever else it may be, and makes a pilgrimage to the göckerli hill in italy, where you can get a peck of laurel-leaves for a kreuzer, the sick child, the sick husband, the sick wife, the sick father, or sick mother, the sick sister, or whosoever else it may be, will be restored to health immediately.”
“i will manage it,” said the woman promptly. now therefore on the wednesday, the peasant woman took to her bed, and complained and lamented as agreed on, and her husband did everything for her that he could think of, but nothing did her any good, and when sunday came the woman said, “i feel as ill as if i were going to die at once, but there is one thing i should like to do before my end i should like to hear the parson’s sermon that he is going to preach to-day.” on that the peasant said, “ah, my child, do not do it—thou mightest make thyself worse if thou wert to get up. look, i will go to the sermon, and will attend to it very carefully, and will tell thee everything the parson says.”
“well,” said the woman, “go, then, and pay great attention, and repeat to me all that thou hearest.” so the peasant went to the sermon, and the parson began to preach and said, if any one had at home a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or any one else, and would make a pilgrimage to the göckerli hill in italy, where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, sick husband, sick wife, sick father, sick mother, sick sister, brother, or whosoever else it might be, would be restored to health instantly, and whosoever wished to undertake the journey was to go to him after the service was over, and he would give him the sack for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer.
then no one was more rejoiced than the peasant, and after the service was over, he went at once to the parson, who gave him the bag for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer. after that he went home, and even at the house door he cried, “hurrah! dear wife, it is now almost the same thing as if thou wert well! the parson has preached to-day that whosoever had at home a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or whoever it might be, and would make a pilgrimage to the göckerli hill in italy, where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, sick husband, sick wife, sick father, sick mother, sick sister, brother, or whosoever else it was, would be cured immediately, and now i have already got the bag and the kreuzer from the parson, and will at once begin my journey so that thou mayst get well the faster,” and thereupon he went away. he was, however, hardly gone before the woman got up, and the parson was there directly.
but now we will leave these two for a while, and follow the peasant, who walked on quickly without stopping, in order to get the sooner to the göckerli hill, and on his way he met his gossip. his gossip was an egg-merchant, and was just coming from the market, where he had sold his eggs. “may you be blessed,” said the gossip, “where are you off to so fast?”
“to all eternity, my friend,” said the peasant, “my wife is ill, and i have been to-day to hear the parson’s sermon, and he preached that if any one had in his house a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or any one else, and made a pilgrimage to the göckerli hill in italy, where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, the sick husband, the sick wife, the sick father, the sick mother, the sick sister, brother or whosoever else it was, would be cured immediately, and so i have got the bag for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer from the parson, and now i am beginning my pilgrimage.” “but listen, gossip,” said the egg-merchant to the peasant, “are you, then, stupid enough to believe such a thing as that? don’t you know what it means? the parson wants to spend a whole day alone with your wife in peace, so he has given you this job to do to get you out of the way.”
“my word!” said the peasant. “how i’d like to know if that’s true!”
“come, then,” said the gossip, “i’ll tell you what to do. get into my egg-basket and i will carry you home, and then you will see for yourself.” so that was settled, and the gossip put the peasant into his egg-basket and carried him home.
when they got to the house, hurrah! but all was going merry there! the woman had already had nearly everything killed that was in the farmyard, and had made pancakes, and the parson was there, and had brought his fiddle with him. the gossip knocked at the door, and woman asked who was there. “it is i, gossip,” said the egg-merchant, “give me shelter this night; i have not sold my eggs at the market, so now i have to carry them home again, and they are so heavy that i shall never be able to do it, for it is dark already.”
“indeed, my friend,” said the woman, “thou comest at a very inconvenient time for me, but as thou art here it can’t be helped, come in, and take a seat there on the bench by the stove.” then she placed the gossip and the basket which he carried on his back on the bench by the stove. the parson, however, and the woman, were as merry as possible. at length the parson said, “listen, my dear friend, thou canst sing beautifully; sing something to me.” “oh,” said the woman, “i cannot sing now, in my young days indeed i could sing well enough, but that’s all over now.”
“come,” said the parson once more, “do sing some little song.”
on that the woman began and sang,
“i’ve sent my husband away from me to the göckerli hill in italy.”
thereupon the parson sang,
“i wish ’twas a year before he came back, i’d never ask him for the laurel-leaf sack.”
hallelujah.
then the gossip who was in the background began to sing (but i ought to tell you the peasant was called hildebrand), so the gossip sang,
“what art thou doing, my hildebrand dear, there on the bench by the stove so near?”
hallelujah.
and then the peasant sang from his basket,
“all singing i ever shall hate from this day, and here in this basket no longer i’ll stay.”
hallelujah.
and he got out of the basket, and cudgelled the parson out of the house.
96 the three little birds
about a thousand or more years ago, there were in this country nothing but small kings, and one of them who lived on the keuterberg was very fond of hunting. once on a time when he was riding forth from his castle with his huntsmen, three girls were watching their cows upon the mountain, and when they saw the king with all his followers, the eldest girl pointed to him, and called to the two other girls, “if i do not get that one, i will have none.” then the second girl answered from the other side of the hill, and pointed to the one who was on the king’s right hand, “hilloa! hilloa! if i do not get him, i will have no one.”
these, however, were the two ministers. the king heard all this, and when he had come back from the chase, he caused the three girls to be brought to him, and asked them what they had said yesterday on the mountain. this they would not tell him, so the king asked the eldest if she really would take him for her husband? then she said, “yes,” and the two ministers married the two sisters, for they were all three fair and beautiful of face, especially the queen, who had hair like flax.
but the two sisters had no children, and once when the king was obliged to go from home he invited them to come to the queen in order to cheer her, for she was about to bear a child. she had a little boy who brought a bright red star into the world with him. then the two sisters said to each other that they would throw the beautiful boy into the water. when they had thrown him in (i believe it was into the weser) a little bird flew up into the air, which sang,
“to thy death art thou sped, until god’s word be said.
in the white lily bloom, brave boy, is thy tomb.”
when the two heard that, they were frightened to death, and ran away in great haste. when the king came home they told him that the queen had been delivered of a dog. then the king said, “what god does, is well done!” but a fisherman who dwelt near the water fished the little boy out again while he was still alive, and as his wife had no children, they reared him. when a year had gone by, the king again went away, and the queen had another little boy, whom the false sisters likewise took and threw into the water. then up flew a little bird again and sang,
“to thy death art thou sped, until god’s word be said.
in the white lily bloom, brave boy, is thy tomb.”
and when the king came back, they told him that the queen had once more given birth to a dog, and he again said, “what god does, is well done.”
the fisherman, however, fished this one also out of the water, and reared him.
then the king again journeyed forth, and the queen had a little girl, whom also the false sisters threw into the water. then again a little bird flew up on high and sang,
“to thy death art thou sped until god’s word be said.
in the white lily bloom, bonny girl, is thy tomb.”
and when the king came home they told him that the queen had been delivered of a cat. then the king grew angry, and ordered his wife to be cast into prison, and therein was she shut up for many long years.
in the meantime the children had grown up. then eldest once went out with some other boys to fish, but the other boys would not have him with them, and said, “go thy way, foundling.”
hereupon he was much troubled, and asked the old fisherman if that was true? the fisherman told him that once when he was fishing he had drawn him out of the water. so the boy said he would go forth and seek his father. the fisherman, however, entreated him to stay, but he would not let himself be hindered, and at last the fisherman consented. then the boy went on his way and walked for many days, and at last he came to a great piece of water by the side of which stood an old woman fishing.
“good day, mother,” said the boy.
“many thanks,” said she.
“thou wilt fish long enough before thou catchest anything.”
“and thou wilt seek long enough before thou findest thy father. how wilt thou get over the water?” said the woman.
“god knows.”
then the old woman took him up on her back and carried him through it, and he sought for a long time, but could not find his father.
when a year had gone by, the second boy set out to seek his brother. he came to the water, and all fared with him just as with his brother. and now there was no one at home but the daughter, and she mourned for her brothers so much that at last she also begged the fisherman to let her set forth, for she wished to go in search of her brothers. then she likewise came to the great piece of water, and she said to the old woman, “good day, mother.”
“many thanks,” replied the old woman.
“may god help you with your fishing,” said the maiden. when the old woman heard that, she became quite friendly, and carried her over the water, gave her a wand, and said to her, “go, my daughter, ever onwards by this road, and when you come to a great black dog, you must pass it silently and boldly, without either laughing or looking at it. then you will come to a great high castle, on the threshold of which you must let the wand fall, and go straight through the castle, and out again on the other side. there you will see an old fountain out of which a large tree has grown, whereon hangs a bird in a cage which you must take down. take likewise a glass of water out of the fountain, and with these two things go back by the same way. pick up the wand again from the threshold and take it with you, and when you again pass by the dog, strike him in the face with it, but be sure that you hit him, and then just come back here to me.” the maiden found everything exactly as the old woman had said, and on her way back she found her two brothers who had sought each other over half the world. they went together to the place where the black dog was lying on the road; she struck it in the face, and it turned into a handsome prince who went with them to the river. there the old woman was still standing. she rejoiced much to see them again, and carried them all over the water, and then she too went away, for now she was freed. the others, however, went to the old fisherman, and all were glad that they had found each other again, but they hung the bird on the wall.
but the second son could not settle at home, and took his cross-bow and went a-hunting. when he was tired he took his flute, and made music.
the king was hunting too, and heard that and went thither, and when he met the youth, he said, “who has given thee leave to hunt here?”
“oh, no one.”
“to whom dost thou belong, then?”
“i am the fisherman’s son.”
“but he has no children.”
“if thou wilt not believe, come with me.”
that the king did, and questioned the fisherman, who told everything to him, and the little bird on the wall began to sing,
“the mother sits alone there in the prison small, o king of royal blood, these are thy children all.
the sisters twain so false, they wrought the children woe, there in the waters deep where the fishermen come and go.”
then they were all terrified, and the king took the bird, the fisherman and the three children back with him to the castle, and ordered the prison to be opened and brought his wife out again. she had, however, grown quite ill and weak. then the daughter gave her some of the water of the fountain to drink, and she became strong and healthy. but the two false sisters were burnt, and the daughter married the prince.
97 the water of life
there was once a king who had an illness, and no one believed that he would come out of it with his life. he had three sons who were much distressed about it, and went down into the palace-garden and wept.
there they met an old man who inquired as to the cause of their grief.
they told him that their father was so ill that he would most certainly die, for nothing seemed to cure him. then the old man said, “i know of one more remedy, and that is the water of life; if he drinks of it he will become well again; but it is hard to find.” the eldest said, “i will manage to find it,” and went to the sick king, and begged to be allowed to go forth in search of the water of life, for that alone could save him. “no,” said the king, “the danger of it is too great. i would rather die.” but he begged so long that the king consented. the prince thought in his heart, “if i bring the water, then i shall be best beloved of my father, and shall inherit the kingdom.” so he set out, and when he had ridden forth a little distance, a dwarf stood there in the road who called to him and said, “whither away so fast?”
“silly shrimp,” said the prince, very haughtily, “it is nothing to do with you,” and rode on. but the little dwarf had grown angry, and had wished an evil wish. soon after this the prince entered a ravine, and the further he rode the closer the mountains drew together, and at last the road became so narrow that he could not advance a step further; it was impossible either to turn his horse or to dismount from the saddle, and he was shut in there as if in prison. the sick king waited long for him, but he came not. then the second son said, “father, let me go forth to seek the water,” and thought to himself, “if my brother is dead, then the kingdom will fall to me.” at first the king would not allow him to go either, but at last he yielded, so the prince set out on the same road that his brother had taken, and he too met the dwarf, who stopped him to ask, whither he was going in such haste? “little shrimp,” said the prince, “that is nothing to thee,” and rode on without giving him another look. but the dwarf bewitched him, and he, like the other, rode into a ravine, and could neither go forwards nor backwards. so fare haughty people.
as the second son also remained away, the youngest begged to be allowed to go forth to fetch the water, and at last the king was obliged to let him go. when he met the dwarf and the latter asked him whither he was going in such haste, he stopped, gave him an explanation, and said, “i am seeking the water of life, for my father is sick unto death.” “dost thou know, then, where that is to be found?” “no,” said the prince. “as thou hast borne thyself as is seemly, and not haughtily like thy false brothers, i will give thee the information and tell thee how thou mayst obtain the water of life. it springs from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted castle, but thou wilt not be able to make thy way to it, if i do not give thee an iron wand and two small loaves of bread.
strike thrice with the wand on the iron door of the castle and it will spring open: inside lie two lions with gaping jaws, but if thou throwest a loaf to each of them, they will be quieted. then hasten to fetch some of the water of life before the clock strikes twelve, else the door will shut again, and thou wilt be imprisoned.” the prince thanked him, took the wand and the bread, and set out on his way. when he arrived, everything was as the dwarf had said. the door sprang open at the third stroke of the wand, and when he had appeased the lions with the bread, he entered the castle, and came to a large and splendid hall, wherein sat some enchanted princes whose rings he drew off their fingers. a sword and a loaf of bread were lying there, which he carried away. after this, he entered a chamber, in which was a beautiful maiden who rejoiced when she saw him, kissed him, and told him that he had delivered her, and should have the whole of her kingdom, and that if he would return in a year their wedding should be celebrated; likewise she told him where the spring of the water of life was, and that he was to hasten and draw some of it before the clock struck twelve. then he went onwards, and at last entered a room where there was a beautiful newly-made bed, and as he was very weary, he felt inclined to rest a little. so he lay down and fell asleep. when he awoke, it was striking a quarter to twelve. he sprang up in a fright, ran to the spring, drew some water in a cup which stood near, and hastened away. but just as he was passing through the iron door, the clock struck twelve, and the door fell to with such violence that it carried away a piece of his heel. he, however, rejoicing at having obtained the water of life, went homewards, and again passed the dwarf. when the latter saw the sword and the loaf, he said, “with these thou hast won great wealth; with the sword thou canst slay whole armies, and the bread will never come to an end.” but the prince would not go home to his father without his brothers, and said, “dear dwarf, canst thou not tell me where my two brothers are? they went out before i did in search of the water of life, and have not returned.” “they are imprisoned between two mountains,” said the dwarf. “i have condemned them to stay there, because they were so haughty.” then the prince begged until the dwarf released them; but he warned him, however, and said, “beware of them, for they have bad hearts.” when his brothers came, he rejoiced, and told them how things had gone with him, that he had found the water of life and had brought a cupful away with him, and had rescued a beautiful princess, who was willing to wait a year for him, and then their wedding was to be celebrated and he would obtain a great kingdom.
after that they rode on together, and chanced upon a land where war and famine reigned, and the king already thought he must perish, for the scarcity was so great. then the prince went to him and gave him the loaf, wherewith he fed and satisfied the whole of his kingdom, and then the prince gave him the sword also wherewith he slew the hosts of his enemies, and could now live in rest and peace. the prince then took back his loaf and his sword, and the three brothers rode on. but after this they entered two more countries where war and famine reigned and each time the prince gave his loaf and his sword to the kings, and had now delivered three kingdoms, and after that they went on board a ship and sailed over the sea. during the passage, the two eldest conversed apart and said, “the youngest has found the water of life and not we, for that our father will give him the kingdom the kingdom which belongs to us, and he will rob us of all our fortune.” they then began to seek revenge, and plotted with each other to destroy him. they waited until they found him fast asleep, then they poured the water of life out of the cup, and took it for themselves, but into the cup they poured salt sea-water. now therefore, when they arrived home, the youngest took his cup to the sick king in order that he might drink out of it, and be cured. but scarcely had he drunk a very little of the salt sea-water than he became still worse than before. and as he was lamenting over this, the two eldest brothers came, and accused the youngest of having intended to poison him, and said that they had brought him the true water of life, and handed it to him. he had scarcely tasted it, when he felt his sickness departing, and became strong and healthy as in the days of his youth. after that they both went to the youngest, mocked him, and said, “you certainly found the water of life, but you have had the pain, and we the gain; you should have been sharper, and should have kept your eyes open. we took it from you whilst you were asleep at sea, and when a year is over, one of us will go and fetch the beautiful princess. but beware that you do not disclose aught of this to our father; indeed he does not trust you, and if you say a single word, you shall lose your life into the bargain, but if you keep silent, you shall have it as a gift.”
the old king was angry with his youngest son, and thought he had plotted against his life. so he summoned the court together and had sentence pronounced upon his son, that he should be secretly shot. and once when the prince was riding forth to the chase, suspecting no evil, the king’s huntsman had to go with him, and when they were quite alone in the forest, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that the prince said to him, “dear huntsman, what ails you?” the huntsman said, “i cannot tell you, and yet i ought.” then the prince said, “say openly what it is, i will pardon you.” “alas!” said the huntsman, “i am to shoot you dead, the king has ordered me to do it.” then the prince was shocked, and said, “dear huntsman, let me live; there, i give you my royal garments; give me your common ones in their stead.” the huntsman said, “i will willingly do that, indeed i should not have been able to shoot you.”
then they exchanged clothes, and the huntsman returned home; the prince, however, went further into the forest. after a time three waggons of gold and precious stones came to the king for his youngest son, which were sent by the three kings who had slain their enemies with the prince’s sword, and maintained their people with his bread, and who wished to show their gratitude for it. the old king then thought, “can my son have been innocent?” and said to his people, “would that he were still alive, how it grieves me that i have suffered him to be killed!” “he still lives,” said the huntsman, “i could not find it in my heart to carry out your command,” and told the king how it had happened. then a stone fell from the king’s heart, and he had it proclaimed in every country that his son might return and be taken into favour again.
the princess, however, had a road made up to her palace which was quite bright and golden, and told her people that whosoever came riding straight along it to her, would be the right wooer and was to be admitted, and whoever rode by the side of it, was not the right one, and was not to be admitted. as the time was now close at hand, the eldest thought he would hasten to go to the king’s daughter, and give himself out as her deliverer, and thus win her for his bride, and the kingdom to boot. therefore he rode forth, and when he arrived in front of the palace, and saw the splendid golden road, he thought, it would be a sin and a shame if he were to ride over that, and turned aside, and rode on the right side of it. but when he came to the door, the servants told him that he was not the right man, and was to go away again. soon after this the second prince set out, and when he came to the golden road, and his horse had put one foot on it, he thought, it would be a sin and a shame to tread a piece of it off, and he turned aside and rode on the left side of it, and when he reached the door, the attendants told him he was not the right one, and he was to go away again. when at last the year had entirely expired, the third son likewise wished to ride out of the forest to his beloved, and with her forget his sorrows. so he set out and thought of her so incessantly, and wished to be with her so much, that he never noticed the golden road at all. so his horse rode onwards up the middle of it, and when he came to the door, it was opened and the princess received him with joy, and said he was her deliverer, and lord of the kingdom, and their wedding was celebrated with great rejoicing. when it was over she told him that his father invited him to come to him, and had forgiven him.
so he rode thither, and told him everything; how his brothers had betrayed him, and how he had nevertheless kept silence. the old king wished to punish them, but they had put to sea, and never came back as long as they lived.
98 doctor knowall
there was once on a time a poor peasant called crabb, who drove with two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor for two thalers. when the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how daintily he ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and he would willingly have been a doctor too. so he remained standing a while, and at length inquired if he too could not be a doctor. “oh, yes,” said the doctor, “that is soon managed.” “what must i do?” asked the peasant.
“in the first place buy thyself an a b c book of the kind which has a cock on the frontispiece: in the second, turn thy cart and thy two oxen into money, and get thyself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for thyself with the words, “i am doctor knowall,” and have that nailed up above thy house-door.”
the peasant did everything that he had been told to do. when he had doctored people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money stolen. then he was told about doctor knowall who lived in such and such a village, and must know what had become of the money. so the lord had the horses put in his carriage, drove out to the village, and asked crabb if he were doctor knowall? yes, he was, he said. then he was to go with him and bring back the stolen money. “oh, yes, but grethe, my wife, must go too.” the lord was willing and let both of them have a seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together.
when they came to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and crabb was told to sit down and eat. “yes, but my wife, grethe, too,”
said he, and he seated himself with her at the table. and when the first servant came with a dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said, “grethe, that was the first,” meaning that was the servant who brought the first dish. the servant, however, thought he intended by that to say, “that is the first thief,” and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said to his comrade outside, “the doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he said i was the first.” the second did not want to go in at all, but was forced. so when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife, and said, “grethe, that is the second.” this servant was just as much alarmed, and he got out. the third did not fare better, for the peasant again said, “grethe, that is the third.” the fourth had to carry in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor that he was to show his skill, and guess what was beneath the cover. the doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and cried, “ah, poor crabb.” when the lord heard that, he cried, “there! he knows it, he knows who has the money!”
on this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment. when therefore he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he did they would be hanged. they led him to the spot where the money was concealed. with this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall, sat down to the table, and said, “my lord, now will i search in my book where the gold is hidden.” the fifth servant, however, crept into the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more.
the doctor, however, sat still and opened his a b c book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and looked for the cock. as he could not find it immediately he said, “i know you are there, so you had better show yourself.” then the fellow in the stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out, crying, “that man knows everything!” then dr. knowall showed the count where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.
99 the spirit in the bottle
there was once a poor woodcutter who toiled from early morning till late night. when at last he had laid by some money he said to his boy, “you are my only child, i will spend the money which i have earned with the sweat of my brow on your education; if you learn some honest trade you can support me in my old age, when my limbs have grown stiff and i am obliged to stay at home.” then the boy went to a high school and learned diligently so that his masters praised him, and he remained there a long time. when he had worked through two classes, but was still not yet perfect in everything, the little pittance which the father had earned was all spent, and the boy was obliged to return home to him. “ah,” said the father, sorrowfully, “i can give you no more, and in these hard times i cannot earn a farthing more than will suffice for our daily bread.” “dear father,” answered the son, “don’t trouble yourself about it, if it is god’s will, it will turn to my advantage i shall soon accustom myself to it.” when the father wanted to go into the forest to earn money by helping to pile and stack wood and also chop it, the son said, “i will go with you and help you.” “nay, my son,” said the father, “that would be hard for you; you are not accustomed to rough work, and will not be able to bear it, besides i have only one axe and no money left wherewith to buy another.” “just go to the neighbour,” answered the son, “he will lend you his axe until i have earned one for myself.” the father then borrowed an axe of the neighbour, and next morning at break of day they went out into the forest together. the son helped his father and was quite merry and brisk about it. but when the sun was right over their heads, the father said, “we will rest, and have our dinner, and then we shall work as well again.” the son took his bread in his hands, and said, “just you rest, father, i am not tired; i will walk up and down a little in the forest, and look for birds’ nests.” “oh, you fool,” said the father, “why should you want to run about there? afterwards you will be tired, and no longer able to raise your arm; stay here, and sit down beside me.” the son, however, went into the forest, ate his bread, was very merry and peered in among the green branches to see if he could discover a bird’s nest anywhere. so he went up and down to see if he could find a bird’s nest until at last he came to a great dangerous-looking oak, which certainly was already many hundred years old, and which five men could not have spanned. he stood still and looked at it, and thought, “many a bird must have built its nest in that.” then all at once it seemed to him that he heard a voice. he listened and became aware that someone was crying in a very smothered voice, “let me out, let me out!” he looked around, but could discover nothing; nevertheless, he fancied that the voice came out of the ground. then he cried, “where art thou?” the voice answered, “i am down here amongst the roots of the oak-tree. let me out! let me out!” the scholar began to loosen the earth under the tree, and search among the roots, until at last he found a glass bottle in a little hollow. he lifted it up and held it against the light, and then saw a creature shaped like a frog, springing up and down in it. “let me out! let me out!” it cried anew, and the scholar thinking no evil, drew the cork out of the bottle. immediately a spirit ascended from it, and began to grow, and grew so fast that in a very few moments he stood before the scholar, a terrible fellow as big as half the tree by which he was standing. “knowest thou,” he cried in an awful voice, “what thy wages are for having let me out?” “no,” replied the scholar fearlessly, “how should i know that?” “then i will tell thee,” cried the spirit; “i must strangle thee for it.” “thou shouldst have told me that sooner,” said the scholar, “for i should then have left thee shut up, but my head shall stand fast for all thou canst do; more persons than one must be consulted about that.” “more persons here, more persons there,” said the spirit. “thou shalt have the wages thou hast earned. dost thou think that i was shut up there for such a long time as a favour. no, it was a punishment for me. i am the mighty mercurius. whoso releases me, him must i strangle.” “softly,” answered the scholar, “not so fast. i must first know that thou really wert shut up in that little bottle, and that thou art the right spirit. if, indeed, thou canst get in again, i will believe and then thou mayst do as thou wilt with me.” the spirit said haughtily, “that is a very trifling feat,” drew himself together, and made himself as small and slender as he had been at first, so that he crept through the same opening, and right through the neck of the bottle in again. scarcely was he within than the scholar thrust the cork he had drawn back into the bottle, and threw it among the roots of the oak into its old place, and the spirit was betrayed.
and now the scolar was about to return to his father, but the spirit cried very piteously, “ah, do let me out! ah, do let me out!” “no,”
answered the scholar, “not a second time! he who has once tried to take my life shall not be set free by me, now that i have caught him again.”
“if thou wilt set me free,” said the spirit, “i will give thee so much that thou wilt have plenty all the days of thy life.” “no,” answered the boy, “thou wouldst cheat me as thou didst the first time.” “thou art playing away with thy own good luck,” said the spirit; “i will do thee no harm but will reward thee richly.” the scholar thought, “i will venture it, perhaps he will keep his word, and anyhow he shall not get the better of me.” then he took out the cork, and the spirit rose up from the bottle as he had done before, stretched himself out and became as big as a giant. “now thou shalt have thy reward,” said he, and handed the scholar a little bag just like a plaster, and said, “if thou spreadest one end of this over a wound it will heal, and if thou rubbest steel or iron with the other end it will be changed into silver.” “i must just try that,” said the scholar, and went to a tree, tore off the bark with his axe, and rubbed it with one end of the plaster. it immediately closed together and was healed. “now, it is all right,” he said to the spirit, “and we can part.” the spirit thanked him for his release, and the boy thanked the spirit for his present, and went back to his father.
“where hast thou been racing about?” said the father; “why hast thou forgotten thy work? i said at once that thou wouldst never get on with anything.” “be easy, father, i will make it up.” “make it up indeed,”
said the father angrily, “there’s no art in that.” “take care, father, i will soon hew that tree there, so that it will split.” then he took his plaster, rubbed the axe with it, and dealt a mighty blow, but as the iron had changed into silver, the edge turned; “hollo, father, just look what a bad axe you’ve given me, it has become quite crooked.” the father was shocked and said, “ah, what hast thou done? now i shall have to pay for that, and have not the wherewithal, and that is all the good i have got by thy work.” “don’t get angry,” said the son, “i will soon pay for the axe.” “oh, thou blockhead,” cried the father, “wherewith wilt thou pay for it? thou hast nothing but what i give thee. these are students’ tricks that are sticking in thy head, but thou hast no idea of wood-cutting.” after a while the scholar said, “father, i can really work no more, we had better take a holiday.” “eh, what!” answered he, “dost thou think i will sit with my hands lying in my lap like thee? i must go on working, but thou mayst take thyself off home.” “father, i am here in this wood for the first time, i don’t know my way alone. do go with me.” as his anger had now abated, the father at last let himself be persuaded and went home with him. then he said to the son, “go and sell thy damaged axe, and see what thou canst get for it, and i must earn the difference, in order to pay the neighbour.” the son took the axe, and carried it into town to a goldsmith, who tested it, laid it in the scales, and said, “it is worth four hundred thalers, i have not so much as that by me.” the son said, “give me what thou hast, i will lend you the rest.” the goldsmith gave him three hundred thalers, and remained a hundred in his debt. the son thereupon went home and said, “father, i have got the money, go and ask the neighbour what he wants for the axe.” “i know that already,” answered the old man, “one thaler, six groschen.” “then give him two thalers, twelve groschen, that is double and enough; see, i have money in plenty,” and he gave the father a hundred thalers, and said, “you shall never know want, live as comfortably as you like.” “good heavens!” said the father, “how hast thou come by these riches?” the scholar then told how all had come to pass, and how he, trusting in his luck, had made such a good hit.
but with the money that was left, he went back to the high school and went on learning more, and as he could heal all wounds with his plaster, he became the most famous doctor in the whole world.
100 the devil’s sooty brother
a disbanded soldier had nothing to live on, and did not know how to get on. so he went out into the forest and when he had walked for a short time, he met a little man who was, however, the devil. the little man said to him, “what ails you, you seem so very sorrowful?” then the soldier said, “i am hungry, but have no money.” the devil said, “if you will hire yourself to me, and be my serving-man, you shall have enough for all your life. you shall serve me for seven years, and after that you shall again be free. but one thing i must tell you, and that is, you must not wash, comb, or trim yourself, or cut your hair or nails, or wipe the water from your eyes.” the soldier said, “all right, if there is no help for it,” and went off with the little man, who straightway led him down into hell. then he told him what he had to do.
he was to poke the fire under the kettles wherein the hell-broth was stewing, keep the house clean, drive all the sweepings behind the doors, and see that everything was in order, but if he once peeped into the kettles, it would go ill with him. the soldier said, “good, i will take care.” and then the old devil went out again on his wanderings, and the soldier entered upon his new duties, made the fire, and swept the dirt well behind the doors, just as he had been bidden. when the old devil came back again, he looked to see if all had been done, appeared satisfied, and went forth a second time. the soldier now took a good look on every side; the kettles were standing all round hell with a mighty fire below them, and inside they were boiling and sputtering. he would have given anything to look inside them, if the devil had not so particularly forbidden him: at last, he could no longer restrain himself, slightly raised the lid of the first kettle, and peeped in, and there he saw his former corporal shut in. “aha, old bird!” said he, “do i meet you here? you once had me in your power, now i have you,” and he quickly let the lid fall, poked the fire, and added a fresh log. after that, he went to the second kettle, raised its lid also a little, and peeped in; his former ensign was in that. “aha, old bird, so i find you here! you once had me in your power, now i have you.” he closed the lid again, and fetched yet another log to make it really hot. then he wanted to see who might be sitting up in the third kettle it was actually be but a general. “aha, old bird, do i meet you here? once you had me in your power, now i have you.” and he fetched the bellows and made hell-fire blaze right under him. so he did his work seven years in hell, did not wash, comb, or trim himself, or cut his hair or nails, or wash the water out of his eyes, and the seven years seemed so short to him that he thought he had only been half a year. now when the time had fully gone by, the devil came and said, “well hans, what have you done?” “i poked the fire under the kettles, and i have swept all the dirt well behind the doors.”
“but you have peeped into the kettles as well; it is lucky for you that you added fresh logs to them, or else your life would have been forfeited; now that your time is up, will you go home again?” “yes,”
said the soldier, “i should very much like to see what my father is doing at home.” the devil said, “in order that you may receive the wages you have earned, go and fill your knapsack full of the sweepings, and take it home with you. you must also go unwashed and uncombed, with long hair on your head and beard, and with uncut nails and dim eyes, and when you are asked whence you come, you must say, “from hell,” and when you are asked who you are, you are to say, “the devil’s sooty brother, and my king as well.” the soldier held his peace, and did as the devil bade him, but he was not at all satisfied with his wages.
then as soon as he was up in the forest again, he took his knapsack from his back, to empty it, but on opening it, the sweepings had become pure gold. “i should never have expected that,” said he, and was well pleased, and entered the town. the landlord was standing in front of the inn, and when he saw the soldier approaching, he was terrified, because hans looked so horrible, worse than a scare-crow. he called to him and asked, “whence comest thou?” “from hell.” “who art thou?” “the devil’s sooty brother, and my king as well.” then the host would not let him enter, but when hans showed him the gold, he came and unlatched the door himself. hans then ordered the best room and attendance, ate, and drank his fill, but neither washed nor combed himself as the devil had bidden him, and at last lay down to sleep. but the knapsack full of gold remained before the eyes of the landlord, and left him no peace, and during the night he crept in and stole it away. next morning, however, when hans got up and wanted to pay the landlord and travel further, behold his knapsack was gone! but he soon composed himself and thought, “thou hast been unfortunate from no fault of thine own,” and straightway went back again to hell, complained of his misfortune to the old devil, and begged for his help. the devil said, “seat yourself, i will wash, comb, and trim you, cut your hair and nails, and wash your eyes for you,” and when he had done with him, he gave him the knapsack back again full of sweepings, and said, “go and tell the landlord that he must return you your money, or else i will come and fetch him, and he shall poke the fire in your place.” hans went up and said to the landlord, “thou hast stolen my money; if thou dost not return it, thou shalt go down to hell in my place, and wilt look as horrible as i.”
then the landlord gave him the money, and more besides, only begging him to keep it secret, and hans was now a rich man.
he set out on his way home to his father, bought himself a shabby smock-frock to wear, and strolled about making music, for he had learned to do that while he was with the devil in hell. there was however, an old king in that country, before whom he had to play, and the king was so delighted with his playing, that he promised him his eldest daughter in marriage. but when she heard that she was to be married to a common fellow in a smock-frock, she said, “rather than do that, i would go into the deepest water.” then the king gave him the youngest, who was quite willing to do it to please her father, and thus the devil’s sooty brother got the king’s daughter, and when the aged king died, the whole kingdom likewise.
101 bearskin
there was once a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier, conducted himself bravely, and was always the foremost when it rained bullets. so long as the war lasted, all went well, but when peace was made, he received his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where he liked. his parents were dead, and he had no longer a home, so he went to his brothers and begged them to take him in, and keep him until war broke out again. the brothers, however, were hard-hearted and said, “what can we do with thee? thou art of no use to us; go and make a living for thyself.” the soldier had nothing left but his gun; he took that on his shoulder, and went forth into the world. he came to a wide heath, on which nothing was to be seen but a circle of trees; under these he sat sorrowfully down, and began to think over his fate. “i have no money,” thought he, “i have learnt no trade but that of fighting, and now that they have made peace they don’t want me any longer; so i see beforehand that i shall have to starve.” all at once he heard a rustling, and when he looked round, a strange man stood before him, who wore a green coat and looked right stately, but had a hideous cloven foot. “i know already what thou art in need of,” said the man; “gold and possessions shall thou have, as much as thou canst make away with do what thou wilt, but first i must know if thou art fearless, that i may not bestow my money in vain.” “a soldier and fear—how can those two things go together?” he answered; “thou canst put me to the proof.” “very well, then,” answered the man, “look behind thee.” the soldier turned round, and saw a large bear, which came growling towards him. “oho!” cried the soldier, “i will tickle thy nose for thee, so that thou shalt soon lose thy fancy for growling,” and he aimed at the bear and shot it through the muzzle; it fell down and never stirred again. “i see quite well,” said the stranger, “that thou art not wanting in courage, but there is still another condition which thou wilt have to fulfil.” “if it does not endanger my salvation,”
replied the soldier, who knew very well who was standing by him. “if it does, i’ll have nothing to do with it.” “thou wilt look to that for thyself,” answered greencoat; “thou shalt for the next seven years neither wash thyself, nor comb thy beard, nor thy hair, nor cut thy nails, nor say one paternoster. i will give thee a coat and a cloak, which during this time thou must wear. if thou diest during these seven years, thou art mine; if thou remainest alive, thou art free, and rich to boot, for all the rest of thy life.” the soldier thought of the great extremity in which he now found himself, and as he so often had gone to meet death, he resolved to risk it now also, and agreed to the terms. the devil took off his green coat, gave it to the soldier, and said, “if thou hast this coat on thy back and puttest thy hand into the pocket, thou wilt always find it full of money.” then he pulled the skin off the bear and said, “this shall be thy cloak, and thy bed also, for thereon shalt thou sleep, and in no other bed shalt thou lie, and because of this apparel shalt thou be called bearskin.” after this the devil vanished.
the soldier put the coat on, felt at once in the pocket, and found that the thing was really true. then he put on the bearskin and went forth into the world, and enjoyed himself, refraining from nothing that did him good and his money harm. during the first year his appearance was passable, but during the second he began to look like a monster. his hair covered nearly the whole of his face, his beard was like a piece of coarse felt, his fingers had claws, and his face was so covered with dirt that if cress had been sown on it, it would have come up.
whosoever saw him, ran away, but as he everywhere gave the poor money to pray that he might not die during the seven years, and as he paid well for everything he still always found shelter. in the fourth year, he entered an inn where the landlord would not receive him, and would not even let him have a place in the stable, because he was afraid the horses would be scared. but as bearskin thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a handful of ducats, the host let himself be persuaded and gave him a room in an outhouse. bearskin was, however, obliged to promise not to let himself be seen, lest the inn should get a bad name.
as bearskin was sitting alone in the evening, and wishing from the bottom of his heart that the seven years were over, he heard a loud lamenting in a neighboring room. he had a compassionate heart, so he opened the door, and saw an old man weeping bitterly, and wringing his hands. bearskin went nearer, but the man sprang to his feet and tried to escape from him. at last when the man perceived that bearskin’s voice was human he let himself be prevailed on, and by kind words bearskin succeeded so far that the old man revealed the cause of his grief. his property had dwindled away by degrees, he and his daughters would have to starve, and he was so poor that he could not pay the innkeeper, and was to be put in prison. “if that is your only trouble,”
said bearskin, “i have plenty of money.” he caused the innkeeper to be brought thither, paid him and put a purse full of gold into the poor old man’s pocket besides.
when the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he did not know how to be grateful enough. “come with me,” said he to bearskin; “my daughters are all miracles of beauty, choose one of them for thyself as a wife. when she hears what thou hast done for me, she will not refuse thee. thou dost in truth look a little strange, but she will soon put thee to rights again.” this pleased bearskin well, and he went. when the eldest saw him she was so terribly alarmed at his face that she screamed and ran away. the second stood still and looked at him from head to foot, but then she said, “how can i accept a husband who no longer has a human form? the shaven bear that once was here and passed itself off for a man pleased me far better, for at any rate it wore a hussar’s dress and white gloves. if it were nothing but ugliness, i might get used to that.” the youngest, however, said, “dear father, that must be a good man to have helped you out of your trouble, so if you have promised him a bride for doing it, your promise must be kept.” it was a pity that bearskin’s face was covered with dirt and with hair, for if not they might have seen how delighted he was when he heard these words. he took a ring from his finger, broke it in two, and gave her one half, the other he kept for himself. he wrote his name, however, on her half, and hers on his, and begged her to keep her piece carefully, and then he took his leave and said, “i must still wander about for three years, and if i do not return then, thou art free, for i shall be dead. but pray to god to preserve my life.”
the poor betrothed bride dressed herself entirely in black, and when she thought of her future bridegroom, tears came into her eyes. nothing but contempt and mockery fell to her lot from her sisters. “take care,”
said the eldest, “if thou givest him thy hand, he will strike his claws into it.” “beware!” said the second. “bears like sweet things, and if he takes a fancy to thee, he will eat thee up.” “thou must always do as he likes,” began the elder again, “or else he will growl.” and the second continued, “but the wedding will be a merry one, for bears dance well.” the bride was silent, and did not let them vex her. bearskin, however, travelled about the world from one place to another, did good where he was able, and gave generously to the poor that they might pray for him.
at length, as the last day of the seven years dawned, he went once more out on to the heath, and seated himself beneath the circle of trees. it was not long before the wind whistled, and the devil stood before him and looked angrily at him; then he threw bearskin his old coat, and asked for his own green one back. “we have not got so far as that yet,”
answered bearskin, “thou must first make me clean.” whether the devil liked it or not, he was forced to fetch water, and wash bearskin, comb his hair, and cut his nails. after this, he looked like a brave soldier, and was much handsomer than he had ever been before.
when the devil had gone away, bearskin was quite lighthearted. he went into the town, put on a magnificent velvet coat, seated himself in a carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove to his bride’s house. no one recognized him, the father took him for a distinguished general, and led him into the room where his daughters were sitting. he was forced to place himself between the two eldest, they helped him to wine, gave him the best pieces of meat, and thought that in all the world they had never seen a handsomer man. the bride, however, sat opposite to him in her black dress, and never raised her eyes, nor spoke a word. when at length he asked the father if he would give him one of his daughters to wife, the two eldest jumped up, ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses, for each of them fancied she was the chosen one. the stranger, as soon as he was alone with his bride, brought out his half of the ring, and threw it in a glass of wine which he reached across the table to her. she took the wine, but when she had drunk it, and found the half ring lying at the bottom, her heart began to beat. she got the other half, which she wore on a ribbon round her neck, joined them, and saw that the two pieces fitted exactly together.
then said he, “i am thy betrothed bridegroom, whom thou sawest as bearskin, but through god’s grace i have again received my human form, and have once more become clean.” he went up to her, embraced her, and gave her a kiss. in the meantime the two sisters came back in full dress, and when they saw that the handsome man had fallen to the share of the youngest, and heard that he was bearskin, they ran out full of anger and rage. one of them drowned herself in the well, the other hanged herself on a tree. in the evening, some one knocked at the door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it was the devil in his green coat, who said, “seest thou, i have now got two souls in the place of thy one!”
102 the willow-wren and the bear
once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest, and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said, “brother wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?” “that is the king of birds,”
said the wolf, “before whom we must bow down.” it was, however, in reality the willow-wren (zaunkönig). “if that’s the case,” said the bear, “i should very much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.” “that is not done quite as you seem to think,” said the wolf; “you must wait until the queen comes.” soon afterwards, the queen arrived with some food in her beak, and the lord king came too, and they began to feed their young ones. the bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him back by the sleeve, and said, “no, you must wait until the lord and lady queen have gone away again.” so they observed the hole in which was the nest, and trotted away. the bear, however, could not rest until he had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, again went to it. the king and queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw five or six young ones lying in it.
“is that the royal palace?” cried the bear; “it is a wretched palace, and you are not king’s children, you are disreputable children!” when the young wrens heard that, they were frightfully angry, and screamed, “no, that we are not! our parents are honest people! bear, thou wilt have to pay for that!”
the bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into their holes. the young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and scream, and when their parents again brought food they said, “we will not so much as touch one fly’s leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have settled whether we are respectable children or not; the bear has been here and has insulted us!” then the old king said, “be easy, he shall be punished,” and he at once flew with the queen to the bear’s cave, and called in, “old growler, why hast thou insulted my children?
thou shalt suffer for it we will punish thee by a bloody war.” thus war was announced to the bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth contained. and the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and flies had to come.
when the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief. the gnat, who was the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled, and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the watchword was to be given. there stood the bear, and he called the fox before him and said, “fox, thou art the most cunning of all animals, thou shalt be general and lead us.” “good,” said the fox, “but what signal shall we agree upon?” no one knew that, so the fox said, “i have a fine long bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. when i lift my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if i let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.” when the gnat had heard that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, with the greatest minuteness, to the willow-wren. when day broke, and the battle was to begin, all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled. the willow-wren also came flying through the air with his army with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each other. but the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to get beneath the fox’s tail, and sting with all his might.
when the fox felt the first sting, he started so that he drew up one leg, with the pain, but he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could hold out no longer, and screamed out and put his tail between his legs. when the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to fly, each into his hole and the birds had won the battle.
then the king and queen flew home to their children and cried, “children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart’s content, we have won the battle!” but the young wrens said, “we will not eat yet, the bear must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honorable children, before we will do that.” then the willow-wren flew to the bear’s hole and cried, “growler, thou art to come to the nest to my children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of thy body shall be broken.” so the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged their pardon. and now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the night.
103 sweet porridge
there was a poor but good little girl who lived alone with her mother, and they no longer had anything to eat. so the child went into the forest, and there an aged woman met her who was aware of her sorrow, and presented her with a little pot, which when she said, “cook, little pot, cook,” would cook good, sweet porridge, and when she said, “stop, little pot,” it ceased to cook. the girl took the pot home to her mother, and now they were freed from their poverty and hunger, and ate sweet porridge as often as they chose. once on a time when the girl had gone out, her mother said, “cook, little pot, cook.” and it did cook and she ate till she was satisfied, and then she wanted the pot to stop cooking, but did not know the word. so it went on cooking and the porridge rose over the edge, and still it cooked on until the kitchen and whole house were full, and then the next house, and then the whole street, just as if it wanted to satisfy the hunger of the whole world, and there was the greatest distress, but no one knew how to stop it. at last when only one single house remained, the child came home and just said, “stop, little pot,” and it stopped and gave up cooking, and whosoever wished to return to the town had to eat his way back.
104 wise folks
one day a peasant took his good hazel-stick out of the corner and said to his wife, “trina, i am going across country, and shall not return for three days. if during that time the cattle-dealer should happen to call and want to buy our three cows, you may strike a bargain at once, but not unless you can get two hundred thalers for them; nothing less, do you hear?” “for heaven’s sake just go in peace,” answered the woman, “i will manage that.” “you, indeed,” said the man. “you once fell on your head when you were a little child, and that affects you even now; but let me tell you this, if you do anything foolish, i will make your back black and blue, and not with paint, i assure you, but with the stick which i have in my hand, and the colouring shall last a whole year, you may rely on that.” and having said that, the man went on his way.
next morning the cattle-dealer came, and the woman had no need to say many words to him. when he had seen the cows and heard the price, he said, “i am quite willing to give that, honestly speaking, they are worth it. i will take the beasts away with me at once.” he unfastened their chains and drove them out of the byre, but just as he was going out of the yard-door, the woman clutched him by the sleeve and said, “you must give me the two hundred thalers now, or i cannot let the cows go.” “true,” answered the man, “but i have forgotten to buckle on my money-belt. have no fear, however, you shall have security for my paying. i will take two cows with me and leave one, and then you will have a good pledge.” the woman saw the force of this, and let the man go away with the cows, and thought to herself, “how pleased hans will be when he finds how cleverly i have managed it!” the peasant came home on the third day as he had said he would, and at once inquired if the cows were sold? “yes, indeed, dear hans,” answered the woman, “and as you said, for two hundred thalers. they are scarcely worth so much, but the man took them without making any objection.” “where is the money?”
asked the peasant. “oh, i have not got the money,” replied the woman; “he had happened to forget his money-belt, but he will soon bring it, and he left good security behind him.” “what kind of security?” asked the man. “one of the three cows, which he shall not have until he has paid for the other two. i have managed very cunningly, for i have kept the smallest, which eats the least.” the man was enraged and lifted up his stick, and was just going to give her the beating he had promised her. suddenly he let the stick fail and said, “you are the stupidest goose that ever waddled on god’s earth, but i am sorry for you. i will go out into the highways and wait for three days to see if i find anyone who is still stupider than you. if i succeed in doing so, you shall go scot-free, but if i do not find him, you shall receive your well-deserved reward without any discount.”
he went out into the great highways, sat down on a stone, and waited for what would happen. then he saw a peasant’s waggon coming towards him, and a woman was standing upright in the middle of it, instead of sitting on the bundle of straw which was lying beside her, or walking near the oxen and leading them. the man thought to himself, “that is certainly one of the kind i am in search of,” and jumped up and ran backwards and forwards in front of the waggon like one who is not very wise. “what do you want, my friend?” said the woman to him; “i don’t know you, where do you come from?” “i have fallen down from heaven,”
replied the man, “and don’t know how to get back again, couldn’t you drive me up?” “no,” said the woman, “i don’t know the way, but if you come from heaven you can surely tell me how my husband, who has been there these three years is. you must have seen him?” “oh, yes, i have seen him, but all men can’t get on well. he keeps sheep, and the sheep give him a great deal to do. they run up the mountains and lose their way in the wilderness, and he has to run after them and drive them together again. his clothes are all torn to pieces too, and will soon fall off his body. there is no tailor there, for saint peter won’t let any of them in, as you know by the story.” “who would have thought it?”
cried the woman, “i tell you what, i will fetch his sunday coat which is still hanging at home in the cupboard, he can wear that and look respectable. you will be so kind as to take it with you.” “that won’t do very well,” answered the peasant; “people are not allowed to take clothes into heaven, they are taken away from one at the gate.” “then hark you,” said the woman, “i sold my fine wheat yesterday and got a good lot of money for it, i will send that to him. if you hide the purse in your pocket, no one will know that you have it.” “if you can’t manage it any other way,” said the peasant, “i will do you that favor.”
“just sit still where you are,” said she, “and i will drive home and fetch the purse, i shall soon be back again. i do not sit down on the bundle of straw, but stand up in the waggon, because it makes it lighter for the cattle.” she drove her oxen away, and the peasant thought, “that woman has a perfect talent for folly, if she really brings the money, my wife may think herself fortunate, for she will get no beating.” it was not long before she came in a great hurry with the money, and with her own hands put it in his pocket. before she went away, she thanked him again a thousand times for his courtesy.
when the woman got home again, she found her son who had come in from the field. she told him what unlooked-for things had befallen her, and then added, “i am truly delighted at having found an opportunity of sending something to my poor husband. who would ever have imagined that he could be suffering for want of anything up in heaven?” the son was full of astonishment. “mother,” said he, “it is not every day that a man comes from heaven in this way, i will go out immediately, and see if he is still to be found; he must tell me what it is like up there, and how the work is done.” he saddled the horse and rode off with all speed. he found the peasant who was sitting under a willow-tree, and was just going to count the money in the purse. “have you seen the man who has fallen down from heaven?” cried the youth to him. “yes,”
answered the peasant, “he has set out on his way back there, and has gone up that hill, from whence it will be rather nearer; you could still catch him up, if you were to ride fast.” “alas,” said the youth, “i have been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here has completely worn me out; you know the man, be so kind as to get on my horse, and go and persuade him to come here.” “aha!” thought the peasant, “here is another who has no wick in his lamp!” “why should i not do you this favor?” said he, and mounted the horse and rode off in a quick trot. the youth remained sitting there till night fell, but the peasant never came back. “the man from heaven must certainly have been in a great hurry, and would not turn back,” thought he, “and the peasant has no doubt given him the horse to take to my father.” he went home and told his mother what had happened, and that he had sent his father the horse so that he might not have to be always running about.
“thou hast done well,” answered she, “thy legs are younger than his, and thou canst go on foot.”
when the peasant got home, he put the horse in the stable beside the cow which he had as a pledge, and then went to his wife and said, “trina, as your luck would have it, i have found two who are still sillier fools than you; this time you escape without a beating, i will store it up for another occasion.” then he lighted his pipe, sat down in his grandfather’s chair, and said, “it was a good stroke of business to get a sleek horse and a great purse full of money into the bargain, for two lean cows. if stupidity always brought in as much as that, i would be quite willing to hold it in honor.” so thought the peasant, but you no doubt prefer the simple folks.
105 stories about snakes
first story.
there was once a little child whose mother gave her every afternoon a small bowl of milk and bread, and the child seated herself in the yard with it. when she began to eat however, a snake came creeping out of a crevice in the wall, dipped its little head in the dish, and ate with her. the child had pleasure in this, and when she was sitting there with her little dish and the snake did not come at once, she cried,
“snake, snake, come swiftly hither come, thou tiny thing, thou shalt have thy crumbs of bread, thou shalt refresh thyself with milk.”
then the snake came in haste, and enjoyed its food. moreover it showed gratitude, for it brought the child all kinds of pretty things from its hidden treasures, bright stones, pearls, and golden playthings. the snake, however, only drank the milk, and left the bread-crumbs alone.
then one day the child took its little spoon and struck the snake gently on its head with it, and said, “eat the bread-crumbs as well, little thing.” the mother, who was standing in the kitchen, heard the child talking to someone, and when she saw that she was striking a snake with her spoon, ran out with a log of wood, and killed the good little creature.
from that time forth, a change came over the child. as long as the snake had eaten with her, she had grown tall and strong, but now she lost her pretty rosy cheeks and wasted away. it was not long before the funeral bird began to cry in the night, and the redbreast to collect little branches and leaves for a funeral garland, and soon afterwards the child lay on her bier.
second story.
an orphan child was sitting on the town walls spinning, when she saw a snake coming out of a hole low down in the wall. swiftly she spread out beside this one of the blue silk handkerchiefs which snakes have such a strong liking for, and which are the only things they will creep on. as soon as the snake saw it, it went back, then returned, bringing with it a small golden crown, laid it on the handkerchief, and then went away again. the girl took up the crown, it glittered and was of delicate golden filagree work. it was not long before the snake came back for the second time, but when it no longer saw the crown, it crept up to the wall, and in its grief smote its little head against it as long as it had strength to do so, until at last it lay there dead. if the girl had but left the crown where it was, the snake would certainly have brought still more of its treasures out of the hole.
third story.
a snake cries, “huhu, huhu.” a child says, “come out.” the snake comes out, then the child inquires about her little sister: “hast thou not seen little red-stockings?” the snake says, “no.” “neither have i.”
“then i am like you. huhu, huhu, huhu.”
106 the poor miller’s boy and the cat
in a certain mill lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child, and three apprentices served under him. as they had been with him several years, he one day said to them, “i am old, and want to sit in the chimney-corner, go out, and whichsoever of you brings me the best horse home, to him will i give the mill, and in return for it he shall take care of me till my death.” the third of the boys was, however, the drudge, who was looked on as foolish by the others; they begrudged the mill to him, and afterwards he would not have it. then all three went out together, and when they came to the village, the two said to stupid hans, “thou mayst just as well stay here, as long as thou livest thou wilt never get a horse.” hans, however, went with them, and when it was night they came to a cave in which they lay down to sleep. the two sharp ones waited until hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, and went away leaving him where he was. and they thought they had done a very clever thing, but it was certain to turn out ill for them. when the sun arose, and hans woke up, he was lying in a deep cavern. he looked around on every side and exclaimed, “oh, heavens, where am i?”
then he got up and clambered out of the cave, went into the forest, and thought, “here i am quite alone and deserted, how shall i obtain a horse now?” whilst he was thus walking full of thought, he met a small tabby-cat which said quite kindly, “hans, where are you going?” “alas, thou canst not help me.” “i well know your desire,” said the cat. “you wish to have a beautiful horse. come with me, and be my faithful servant for seven years long, and then i will give you one more beautiful than any you have ever seen in your whole life.” “well, this is a wonderful cat!” thought hans, “but i am determined to see if she is telling the truth.” so she took him with her into her enchanted castle, where there were nothing but cats who were her servants. they leapt nimbly upstairs and downstairs, and were merry and happy. in the evening when they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make music.
one played the bassoon, the other the fiddle, and the third put the trumpet to his lips, and blew out his cheeks as much as he possibly could. when they had dined, the table was carried away, and the cat said, “now, hans, come and dance with me.” “no,” said he, “i won’t dance with a pussy cat. i have never done that yet.” “then take him to bed,” said she to the cats. so one of them lighted him to his bed-room, one pulled his shoes off, one his stockings, and at last one of them blew out the candle. next morning they returned and helped him out of bed, one put his stockings on for him, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes, one washed him, and one dried his face with her tail. “that feels very soft!” said hans. he, however, had to serve the cat, and chop some wood every day, and to do that, he had an axe of silver, and the wedge and saw were of silver and the mallet of copper.
so he chopped the wood small; stayed there in the house and had good meat and drink, but never saw anyone but the tabby-cat and her servants. once she said to him, “go and mow my meadow, and dry the grass,” and gave him a scythe of silver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him deliver them up again carefully. so hans went thither, and did what he was bidden, and when he had finished the work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, and hay to the house, and asked if it was not yet time for her to give him his reward. “no,” said the cat, “you must first do something more for me of the same kind. there is timber of silver, carpenter’s axe, square, and everything that is needful, all of silver, with these build me a small house.” then hans built the small house, and said that he had now done everything, and still he had no horse. nevertheless the seven years had gone by with him as if they were six months. the cat asked him if he would like to see her horses?
“yes,” said hans. then she opened the door of the small house, and when she had opened it, there stood twelve horses, such horses, so bright and shining, that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them. and now she gave him to eat and drink, and said, “go home, i will not give thee thy horse away with thee; but in three days’ time i will follow thee and bring it.” so hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill. she had, however, never once given him a new coat, and he had been obliged to keep on his dirty old smock-frock, which he had brought with him, and which during the seven years had everywhere become too small for him. when he reached home, the two other apprentices were there again as well, and each of them certainly had brought a horse with him, but one of them was a blind one, and the other lame. they asked hans where his horse was. “it will follow me in three days’ time.” then they laughed and said, “indeed, stupid hans, where wilt thou get a horse?”
“it will be a fine one!” hans went into the parlour, but the miller said he should not sit down to table, for he was so ragged and torn, that they would all be ashamed of him if any one came in. so they gave him a mouthful of food outside, and at night, when they went to rest, the two others would not let him have a bed, and at last he was forced to creep into the goose-house, and lie down on a little hard straw. in the morning when he awoke, the three days had passed, and a coach came with six horses and they shone so bright that it was delightful to see them! and a servant brought a seventh as well, which was for the poor miller’s boy. and a magnificent princess alighted from the coach and went into the mill, and this princess was the little tabby-cat whom poor hans had served for seven years. she asked the miller where the miller’s boy and drudge was? then the miller said, “we cannot have him here in the mill, for he is so ragged; he is lying in the goose-house.”
then the king’s daughter said that they were to bring him immediately.
so they brought him out, and he had to hold his little smock-frock together to cover himself. the servants unpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed him, and when that was done, no king could have looked more handsome. then the maiden desired to see the horses which the other apprentices had brought home with them, and one of them was blind and the other lame. so she ordered the servant to bring the seventh horse, and when the miller saw it, he said that such a horse as that had never yet entered his yard. “and that is for the third miller’s boy,” said she. “then he must have the mill,” said the miller, but the king’s daughter said that the horse was there, and that he was to keep his mill as well, and took her faithful hans and set him in the coach, and drove away with him. they first drove to the little house which he had built with the silver tools, and behold it was a great castle, and everything inside it was of silver and gold; and then she married him, and he was rich, so rich that he had enough for all the rest of his life. after this, let no one ever say that anyone who is silly can never become a person of importance.
107 the two travellers
hill and vale do not come together, but the children of men do, good and bad. in this way a shoemaker and a tailor once met with each other in their travels. the tailor was a handsome little fellow who was always merry and full of enjoyment. he saw the shoemaker coming towards him from the other side, and as he observed by his bag what kind of a trade he plied, he sang a little mocking song to him,
“sew me the seam, draw me the thread, spread it over with pitch, knock the nail on the head.”
the shoemaker, however, could not endure a joke; he pulled a face as if he had drunk vinegar, and made a gesture as if he were about to seize the tailor by the throat. but the little fellow began to laugh, reached him his bottle, and said, “no harm was meant, take a drink, and swallow your anger down.” the shoemaker took a very hearty drink, and the storm on his face began to clear away. he gave the bottle back to the tailor, and said, “i spoke civilly to you; one speaks well after much drinking, but not after much thirst. shall we travel together?” “all right,”
answered the tailor, “if only it suits you to go into a big town where there is no lack of work.” “that is just where i want to go,” answered the shoemaker. “in a small nest there is nothing to earn, and in the country, people like to go barefoot.” they travelled therefore onwards together, and always set one foot before the other like a weasel in the snow.
both of them had time enough, but little to bite and to break. when they reached a town they went about and paid their respects to the tradesmen, and because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and had such pretty red cheeks, every one gave him work willingly, and when luck was good the master’s daughters gave him a kiss beneath the porch, as well. when he again fell in with the shoemaker, the tailor had always the most in his bundle. the ill-tempered shoemaker made a wry face, and thought, “the greater the rascal the more the luck,” but the tailor began to laugh and to sing, and shared all he got with his comrade. if a couple of pence jingled in his pockets, he ordered good cheer, and thumped the table in his joy till the glasses danced, and it was lightly come, lightly go, with him.
when they had travelled for some time, they came to a great forest through which passed the road to the capital. two foot-paths, however, led through it, one of which was a seven days’ journey, and the other only two, but neither of the travellers knew which way was the short one. they seated themselves beneath an oak-tree, and took counsel together how they should forecast, and for how many days they should provide themselves with bread. the shoemaker said, “one must look before one leaps, i will take with me bread for a week.” “what!” said the tailor, “drag bread for seven days on one’s back like a beast of burden, and not be able to look about. i shall trust in god, and not trouble myself about anything! the money i have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, but in hot weather bread gets dry, and mouldy into the bargain; even my coat does not go as far as it might. besides, why should we not find the right way? bread for two days, and that’s enough.” each, therefore, bought his own bread, and then they tried their luck in the forest.
it was as quiet there as in a church. no wind stirred, no brook murmured, no bird sang, and through the thickly-leaved branches no sunbeam forced its way. the shoemaker spoke never a word, the heavy bread weighed down his back until the perspiration streamed down his cross and gloomy face. the tailor, however, was quite merry, he jumped about, whistled on a leaf, or sang a song, and thought to himself, “god in heaven must be pleased to see me so happy.”
this lasted two days, but on the third the forest would not come to an end, and the tailor had eaten up all his bread, so after all his heart sank down a yard deeper. in the meantime he did not lose courage, but relied on god and on his luck. on the third day he lay down in the evening hungry under a tree, and rose again next morning hungry still; so also passed the fourth day, and when the shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner, the tailor was only a looker-on.
if he begged for a little piece of bread the other laughed mockingly, and said, “thou hast always been so merry, now thou canst try for once what it is to be sad: the birds which sing too early in the morning are struck by the hawk in the evening,” in short he was pitiless. but on the fifth morning the poor tailor could no longer stand up, and was hardly able to utter one word for weakness; his cheeks were white, and his eyes red. then the shoemaker said to him, “i will give thee a bit of bread to-day, but in return for it, i will put out thy right eye.”
the unhappy tailor who still wished to save his life, could not do it in any other way; he wept once more with both eyes, and then held them out, and the shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right eye with a sharp knife. the tailor called to remembrance what his mother had formerly said to him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry. “eat what one can, and suffer what one must.” when he had consumed his dearly-bought bread, he got on his legs again, forgot his misery and comforted himself with the thought that he could always see enough with one eye. but on the sixth day, hunger made itself felt again, and gnawed him almost to the heart. in the evening he fell down by a tree, and on the seventh morning he could not raise himself up for faintness, and death was close at hand. then said the shoemaker, “i will show mercy and give thee bread once more, but thou shalt not have it for nothing, i shall put out thy other eye for it.” and now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been, prayed to god for forgiveness, and said, “do what thou wilt, i will bear what i must, but remember that our lord god does not always look on passively, and that an hour will come when the evil deed which thou hast done to me, and which i have not deserved of thee, will be requited. when times were good with me, i shared what i had with thee. my trade is of that kind that each stitch must always be exactly like the other. if i no longer have my eyes and can sew no more i must go a-begging. at any rate do not leave me here alone when i am blind, or i shall die of hunger.” the shoemaker, however, who had driven god out of his heart, took the knife and put out his left eye. then he gave him a bit of bread to eat, held out a stick to him, and drew him on behind him.
when the sun went down, they got out of the forest, and before them in the open country stood the gallows. thither the shoemaker guided the blind tailor, and then left him alone and went his way. weariness, pain, and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep, and he slept the whole night. when day dawned he awoke, but knew not where he lay. two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows, and a crow sat on the head of each of them. then one of the men who had been hanged began to speak, and said, “brother, art thou awake?” “yes, i am awake,” answered the second. “then i will tell thee something,” said the first; “the dew which this night has fallen down over us from the gallows, gives every one who washes himself with it his eyes again. if blind people did but know this, how many would regain their sight who do not believe that to be possible.”
when the tailor heard that, he took his pocket-handkerchief, pressed it on the grass, and when it was moist with dew, washed the sockets of his eyes with it. immediately was fulfilled what the man on the gallows had said, and a couple of healthy new eyes filled the sockets. it was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise behind the mountains; in the plain before him lay the great royal city with its magnificent gates and hundred towers, and the golden balls and crosses which were on the spires began to shine. he could distinguish every leaf on the trees, saw the birds which flew past, and the midges which danced in the air.
he took a needle out of his pocket, and as he could thread it as well as ever he had done, his heart danced with delight. he threw himself on his knees, thanked god for the mercy he had shown him, and said his morning prayer. he did not forget also to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging there swinging against each other in the wind like the pendulums of clocks. then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot the pain of heart he had endured, and went on his way singing and whistling.
the first thing he met was a brown foal running about the fields at large. he caught it by the mane, and wanted to spring on it and ride into the town. the foal, however, begged to be set free. “i am still too young,” it said, “even a light tailor such as thou art would break my back in two let me go till i have grown strong. a time may perhaps come when i may reward thee for it.” “run off,” said the tailor, “i see thou art still a giddy thing.” he gave it a touch with a switch over its back, whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for joy, leapt over hedges and ditches, and galloped away into the open country.
but the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. “the sun to be sure fills my eyes,” said he, “but the bread does not fill my mouth. the first thing that comes across me and is even half edible will have to suffer for it.” in the meantime a stork stepped solemnly over the meadow towards him. “halt, halt!” cried the tailor, and seized him by the leg. “i don’t know if thou art good to eat or not, but my hunger leaves me no great choice. i must cut thy head off, and roast thee.” “don’t do that,” replied the stork; “i am a sacred bird which brings mankind great profit, and no one does me an injury. leave me my life, and i may do thee good in some other way.” “well, be off, cousin longlegs,” said the tailor. the stork rose up, let its long legs hang down, and flew gently away.
“what’s to be the end of this?” said the tailor to himself at last, “my hunger grows greater and greater, and my stomach more and more empty.
whatsoever comes in my way now is lost.” at this moment he saw a couple of young ducks which were on a pond come swimming towards him. “you come just at the right moment,” said he, and laid hold of one of them and was about to wring its neck. on this an old duck which was hidden among the reeds, began to scream loudly, and swam to him with open beak, and begged him urgently to spare her dear children. “canst thou not imagine,” said she, “how thy mother would mourn if any one wanted to carry thee off, and give thee thy finishing stroke?” “only be quiet,” said the good-tempered tailor, “thou shalt keep thy children,”
and put the prisoner back into the water.
when he turned round, he was standing in front of an old tree which was partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it. “there i shall at once find the reward of my good deed,” said the tailor, “the honey will refresh me.” but the queen-bee came out, threatened him and said, “if thou touchest my people, and destroyest my nest, our stings shall pierce thy skin like ten thousand red-hot needles. but if thou wilt leave us in peace and go thy way, we will do thee a service for it another time.”
the little tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done. “three dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinner!” he dragged himself therefore with his starved-out stomach into the town, and as it was just striking twelve, all was ready-cooked for him in the inn, and he was able to sit down at once to dinner. when he was satisfied he said, “now i will get to work.” he went round the town, sought a master, and soon found a good situation. as, however, he had thoroughly learnt his trade, it was not long before he became famous, and every one wanted to have his new coat made by the little tailor, whose importance increased daily. “i can go no further in skill,” said he, “and yet things improve every day.” at last the king appointed him court-tailor.
but how things do happen in the world! on the very same day his former comrade the shoemaker also became court-shoemaker. when the latter caught sight of the tailor, and saw that he had once more two healthy eyes, his conscience troubled him. “before he takes revenge on me,”
thought he to himself, “i must dig a pit for him.” he, however, who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself. in the evening when work was over and it had grown dusk, he stole to the king and said, “lord king, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has boasted that he will get the gold crown back again which was lost in ancient times.” “that would please me very much,” said the king, and he caused the tailor to be brought before him next morning, and ordered him to get the crown back again, or to leave the town for ever. “oho!” thought the tailor, “a rogue gives more than he has got. if the surly king wants me to do what can be done by no one, i will not wait till morning, but will go out of the town at once, to-day.” he packed up his bundle, therefore, but when he was without the gate he could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune, and turn his back on the town in which all had gone so well with him. he came to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks; at that very moment the old one whose young ones he had spared, was sitting there by the shore, pluming herself with her beak.
she knew him again instantly, and asked why he was hanging his head so?
“thou wilt not be surprised when thou hearest what has befallen me,”
replied the tailor, and told her his fate. “if that be all,” said the duck, “we can help thee. the crown fell into the water, and lies down below at the bottom; we will soon bring it up again for thee. in the meantime just spread out thy handkerchief on the bank.” she dived down with her twelve young ones, and in five minutes she was up again and sat with the crown resting on her wings, and the twelve young ones were swimming round about and had put their beaks under it, and were helping to carry it. they swam to the shore and put the crown on the handkerchief. no one can imagine how magnificent the crown was; when the sun shone on it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles. the tailor tied his handkerchief together by the four corners, and carried it to the king, who was full of joy, and put a gold chain round the tailor’s neck.
when the shoemaker saw that one stroke had failed, he contrived a second, and went to the king and said, “lord king, the tailor has become insolent again; he boasts that he will copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything that pertains to it, loose or fast, inside and out.” the king sent for the tailor and ordered him to copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything that pertained to it, movable or immovable, within and without, and if he did not succeed in doing this, or if so much as one nail on the wall were wanting, he should be imprisoned for his whole life under ground.
the tailor thought, “it gets worse and worse! no one can endure that?”
and threw his bundle on his back, and went forth. when he came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head. the bees came flying out, and the queen-bee asked him if he had a stiff neck, since he held his head so awry? “alas, no,” answered the tailor, “something quite different weighs me down,” and he told her what the king had demanded of him. the bees began to buzz and hum amongst themselves, and the queen-bee said, “just go home again, but come back to-morrow at this time, and bring a large sheet with you, and then all will be well.” so he turned back again, but the bees flew to the royal palace and straight into it through the open windows, crept round about into every corner, and inspected everything most carefully. then they hurried back and modelled the palace in wax with such rapidity that any one looking on would have thought it was growing before his eyes. by the evening all was ready, and when the tailor came next morning, the whole of the splendid building was there, and not one nail in the wall or tile of the roof was wanting, and it was delicate withal, and white as snow, and smelt sweet as honey. the tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to the king, who could not admire it enough, placed it in his largest hall, and in return for it presented the tailor with a large stone house.
the shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went for the third time to the king and said, “lord king, it has come to the tailor’s ears that no water will spring up in the court-yard of the castle, and he has boasted that it shall rise up in the midst of the court-yard to a man’s height and be clear as crystal.” then the king ordered the tailor to be brought before him and said, “if a stream of water does not rise in my court-yard by to-morrow as thou hast promised, the executioner shall in that very place make thee shorter by the head.” the poor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hurried out to the gate, and because this time it was a matter of life and death to him, tears rolled down his face. whilst he was thus going forth full of sorrow, the foal to which he had formerly given its liberty, and which had now become a beautiful chestnut horse, came leaping towards him. “the time has come,” it said to the tailor, “when i can repay thee for thy good deed.
i know already what is needful to thee, but thou shalt soon have help; get on me, my back can carry two such as thou.” the tailor’s courage came back to him; he jumped up in one bound, and the horse went full speed into the town, and right up to the court-yard of the castle. it galloped as quick as lightning thrice round it, and at the third time it fell violently down. at the same instant, however, there was a terrific clap of thunder, a fragment of earth in the middle of the court-yard sprang like a cannon-ball into the air, and over the castle, and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as a man on horseback, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams began to dance on it. when the king saw that he arose in amazement, and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of all men.
but good fortune did not last long. the king had daughters in plenty, one still prettier than the other, but he had no son. so the malicious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the king, and said, “lord king, the tailor has not given up his arrogance. he has now boasted that if he liked, he could cause a son to be brought to the lord king through the air.” the king commanded the tailor to be summoned, and said, “if thou causest a son to be brought to me within nine days, thou shalt have my eldest daughter to wife.” “the reward is indeed great,” thought the little tailor; “one would willingly do something for it, but the cherries grow too high for me, if i climb for them, the bough will break beneath me, and i shall fall.”
he went home, seated himself cross-legged on his work-table, and thought over what was to be done. “it can’t be managed,” cried he at last, “i will go away; after all i can’t live in peace here.” he tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate. when he got to the meadow, he perceived his old friend the stork, who was walking backwards and forwards like a philosopher. sometimes he stood still, took a frog into close consideration, and at length swallowed it down. the stork came to him and greeted him. “i see,” he began, “that thou hast thy pack on thy back. why art thou leaving the town?” the tailor told him what the king had required of him, and how he could not perform it, and lamented his misfortune. “don’t let thy hair grow grey about that,” said the stork, “i will help thee out of thy difficulty. for a long time now, i have carried the children in swaddling-clothes into the town, so for once in a way i can fetch a little prince out of the well. go home and be easy.
in nine days from this time repair to the royal palace, and there will i come.” the little tailor went home, and at the appointed time was at the castle. it was not long before the stork came flying thither and tapped at the window. the tailor opened it, and cousin longlegs came carefully in, and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble pavement. he had, moreover, a baby in his beak that was as lovely as an angel, and stretched out its little hands to the queen. the stork laid it in her lap, and she caressed it and kissed it, and was beside herself with delight. before the stork flew away, he took his travelling bag off his back and handed it over to the queen. in it there were little paper parcels with colored sweetmeats, and they were divided amongst the little princesses. the eldest, however, had none of them, but got the merry tailor for a husband. “it seems to me,” said he, “just as if i had won the highest prize. my mother was if right after all, she always said that whoever trusts in god and only has good luck, can never fail.”
the shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced at the wedding festival, after which he was commanded to quit the town for ever. the road to the forest led him to the gallows. worn out with anger, rage, and the heat of the day, he threw himself down. when he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the two crows flew down from the heads of the men who were hanging there, and pecked his eyes out. in his madness he ran into the forest and must have died there of hunger, for no one has ever either seen him again or heard of him.
108 hans the hedgehog
there was once a countryman who had money and land in plenty, but how rich soever he was, one thing was still wanting in his happiness he had no children. often when he went into the town with the other peasants they mocked him and asked why he had no children. at last he became angry, and when he got home he said, “i will have a child, even if it be a hedgehog.” then his wife had a child, that was a hedgehog in the upper part of his body, and a boy in the lower, and when she saw the child, she was terrified, and said, “see, there thou hast brought ill-luck on us.” then said the man, “what can be done now? the boy must be christened, but we shall not be able to get a godfather for him.”
the woman said, “and we cannot call him anything else but hans the hedgehog.”
when he was christened, the parson said, “he cannot go into any ordinary bed because of his spikes.” so a little straw was put behind the stove, and hans the hedgehog was laid on it. his mother could not suckle him, for he would have pricked her with his quills. so he lay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father was tired of him and thought, “if he would but die!” he did not die, however, but remained lying there. now it happened that there was a fair in the town, and the peasant was about to go to it, and asked his wife what he should bring back with him for her. “a little meat and a couple of white rolls which are wanted for the house,” said she. then he asked the servant, and she wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with clocks. at last he said also, “and what wilt thou have, hans my hedgehog?” “dear father,” he said, “do bring me bagpipes.” when, therefore, the father came home again, he gave his wife what he had bought for her; meat and white rolls, and then he gave the maid the slippers, and the stockings with clocks; and, lastly, he went behind the stove, and gave hans the hedgehog the bagpipes. and when hans the hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said, “dear father, do go to the forge and get the cock shod, and then i will ride away, and never come back again.” on this, the father was delighted to think that he was going to get rid of him, and had the cock shod for him, and when it was done, hans the hedgehog got on it, and rode away, but took swine and asses with him which he intended to keep in the forest. when they got there he made the cock fly on to a high tree with him, and there he sat for many a long year, and watched his asses and swine until the herd was quite large, and his father knew nothing about him. while he was sitting in the tree, however, he played his bagpipes, and made music which was very beautiful. once a king came travelling by who had lost his way and heard the music. he was astonished at it, and sent his servant forth to look all round and see from whence this music came. he spied about, but saw nothing but a little animal sitting up aloft on the tree, which looked like a cock with a hedgehog on it which made this music. then the king told the servant he was to ask why he sat there, and if he knew the road which led to his kingdom. so hans the hedgehog descended from the tree, and said he would show the way if the king would write a bond and promise him whatever he first met in the royal courtyard as soon as he arrived at home. then the king thought, “i can easily do that, hans the hedgehog understands nothing, and i can write what i like.” so the king took pen and ink and wrote something, and when he had done it, hans the hedgehog showed him the way, and he got safely home. but his daughter, when she saw him from afar, was so overjoyed that she ran to meet him, and kissed him. then he remembered hans the hedgehog, and told her what had happened, and that he had been forced to promise whatsoever first met him when he got home, to a very strange animal which sat on a cock as if it were a horse, and made beautiful music, but that instead of writing that he should have what he wanted, he had written that he should not have it. thereupon the princess was glad, and said he had done well, for she never would have gone away with the hedgehog.
hans the hedgehog, however, looked after his asses and pigs, and was always merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes.
now it came to pass that another king came journeying by with his attendants and runners, and he also had lost his way, and did not know how to get home again because the forest was so large. he likewise heard the beautiful music from a distance, and asked his runner what that could be, and told him to go and see. then the runner went under the tree, and saw the cock sitting at the top of it, and hans the hedgehog on the cock. the runner asked him what he was about up there?
“i am keeping my asses and my pigs; but what is your desire?” the messenger said that they had lost their way, and could not get back into their own kingdom, and asked if he would not show them the way.
then hans the hedgehog got down the tree with the cock, and told the aged king that he would show him the way, if he would give him for his own whatsoever first met him in front of his royal palace. the king said, “yes,” and wrote a promise to hans the hedgehog that he should have this. that done, hans rode on before him on the cock, and pointed out the way, and the king reached his kingdom again in safety. when he got to the courtyard, there were great rejoicings. now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful; she ran to meet him, threw her arms round his neck, and was delighted to have her old father back again.
she asked him where in the world he had been so long. so he told her how he had lost his way, and had very nearly not come back at all, but that as he was travelling through a great forest, a creature, half hedgehog, half man, who was sitting astride a cock in a high tree, and making music, had shown him the way and helped him to get out, but that in return he had promised him whatsoever first met him in the royal court-yard, and how that was she herself, which made him unhappy now.
but on this she promised that, for love of her father, she would willingly go with this hans if he came.
hans the hedgehog, however, took care of his pigs, and the pigs multiplied until they became so many in number that the whole forest was filled with them. then hans the hedgehog resolved not to live in the forest any longer, and sent word to his father to have every stye in the village emptied, for he was coming with such a great herd that all might kill who wished to do so. when his father heard that, he was troubled, for he thought hans the hedgehog had died long ago. hans the hedgehog, however, seated himself on the cock, and drove the pigs before him into the village, and ordered the slaughter to begin. ha!
but there was a killing and a chopping that might have been heard two miles off! after this hans the hedgehog said, “father, let me have the cock shod once more at the forge, and then i will ride away and never come back as long as i live.” then the father had the cock shod once more, and was pleased that hans the hedgehog would never return again.
hans the hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom. there the king had commanded that whosoever came mounted on a cock and had bagpipes with him should be shot at, cut down, or stabbed by everyone, so that he might not enter the palace. when, therefore, hans the hedgehog came riding thither, they all pressed forward against him with their pikes, but he spurred the cock and it flew up over the gate in front of the king’s window and lighted there, and hans cried that the king must give him what he had promised, or he would take both his life and his daughter’s. then the king began to speak his daughter fair, and to beg her to go away with hans in order to save her own life and her father’s. so she dressed herself in white, and her father gave her a carriage with six horses and magnificent attendants together with gold and possessions. she seated herself in the carriage, and placed hans the hedgehog beside her with the cock and the bagpipes, and then they took leave and drove away, and the king thought he should never see her again. he was however, deceived in his expectation, for when they were at a short distance from the town, hans the hedgehog took her pretty clothes off, and pierced her with his hedgehog’s skin until she bled all over. “that is the reward of your falseness,” said he, “go your way, i will not have you!” and on that he chased her home again, and she was disgraced for the rest of her life.
hans the hedgehog, however, rode on further on the cock, with his bagpipes, to the dominions of the second king to whom he had shown the way. this one, however, had arranged that if any one resembling hans the hedgehog should come, they were to present arms, give him safe conduct, cry long life to him, and lead him to the royal palace.
but when the king’s daughter saw him she was terrified, for he looked quite too strange. she remembered however, that she could not change her mind, for she had given her promise to her father. so hans the hedgehog was welcomed by her, and married to her, and had to go with her to the royal table, and she seated herself by his side, and they ate and drank. when the evening came and they wanted to go to sleep, she was afraid of his quills, but he told her she was not to fear, for no harm would befall her, and he told the old king that he was to appoint four men to watch by the door of the chamber, and light a great fire, and when he entered the room and was about to get into bed, he would creep out of his hedgehog’s skin and leave it lying there by the bedside, and that the men were to run nimbly to it, throw it in the fire, and stay by it until it was consumed. when the clock struck eleven, he went into the chamber, stripped off the hedgehog’s skin, and left it lying by the bed. then came the men and fetched it swiftly, and threw it in the fire; and when the fire had consumed it, he was delivered, and lay there in bed in human form, but he was coal-black as if he had been burnt. the king sent for his physician who washed him with precious salves, and anointed him, and he became white, and was a handsome young man. when the king’s daughter saw that she was glad, and the next morning they arose joyfully, ate and drank, and then the marriage was properly solemnized, and hans the hedgehog received the kingdom from the aged king.
when several years had passed he went with his wife to his father, and said that he was his son. the father, however, declared he had no son he had never had but one, and he had been born like a hedgehog with spikes, and had gone forth into the world. then hans made himself known, and the old father rejoiced and went with him to his kingdom.
my tale is done, and away it has run to little august’s house.
109 the shroud
there was once a mother who had a little boy of seven years old, who was so handsome and lovable that no one could look at him without liking him, and she herself worshipped him above everything in the world. now it so happened that he suddenly became ill, and god took him to himself; and for this the mother could not be comforted, and wept both day and night. but soon afterwards, when the child had been buried, it appeared by night in the places where it had sat and played during its life, and if the mother wept, it wept also, and when morning came it disappeared. as, however, the mother would not stop crying, it came one night, in the little white shroud in which it had been laid in its coffin, and with its wreath of flowers round its head, and stood on the bed at her feet, and said, “oh, mother, do stop crying, or i shall never fall asleep in my coffin, for my shroud will not dry because of all thy tears, which fall upon it.” the mother was afraid when she heard that, and wept no more. the next night the child came again, and held a little light in its hand, and said, “look, mother, my shroud is nearly dry, and i can rest in my grave.” then the mother gave her sorrow into god’s keeping, and bore it quietly and patiently, and the child came no more, but slept in its little bed beneath the earth.
110 the jew among thorns
there was once a rich man, who had a servant who served him diligently and honestly: he was every morning the first out of bed, and the last to go to rest at night; and, whenever there was a difficult job to be done, which nobody cared to undertake, he was always the first to set himself to it. moreover, he never complained, but was contented with everything, and always merry.
when a year was ended, his master gave him no wages, for he said to himself, “that is the cleverest way; for i shall save something, and he will not go away, but stay quietly in my service.” the servant said nothing, but did his work the second year as he had done it the first; and when at the end of this, likewise, he received no wages, he made himself happy, and still stayed on.
when the third year also was past, the master considered, put his hand in his pocket, but pulled nothing out. then at last the servant said, “master, for three years i have served you honestly, be so good as to give me what i ought to have, for i wish to leave, and look about me a little more in the world.”
“yes, my good fellow,” answered the old miser; “you have served me industriously, and, therefore, you shall be cheerfully rewarded;” and he put his hand into his pocket, but counted out only three farthings, saying, “there, you have a farthing for each year; that is large and liberal pay, such as you would have received from few masters.”
the honest servant, who understood little about money, put his fortune into his pocket, and thought, “ah! now that i have my purse full, why need i trouble and plague myself any longer with hard work!” so on he went, up hill and down dale; and sang and jumped to his heart’s content. now it came to pass that as he was going by a thicket a little man stepped out, and called to him, “whither away, merry brother? i see you do not carry many cares.” “why should i be sad?” answered the servant; “i have enough; three years’ wages are jingling in my pocket.”
“how much is your treasure?” the dwarf asked him. “how much? three farthings sterling, all told.” “look here,” said the dwarf, “i am a poor needy man, give me your three farthings; i can work no longer, but you are young, and can easily earn your bread.”
and as the servant had a good heart, and felt pity for the old man, he gave him the three farthings, saying, “take them in the name of heaven, i shall not be any the worse for it.”
then the little man said, “as i see you have a good heart i grant you three wishes, one for each farthing, they shall all be fulfilled.”
“aha?” said the servant, “you are one of those who can work wonders!
well, then, if it is to be so, i wish, first, for a gun, which shall hit everything that i aim at; secondly, for a fiddle, which when i play on it, shall compel all who hear it to dance; thirdly, that if i ask a favor of any one he shall not be able to refuse it.”
“all that shall you have,” said the dwarf; and put his hand into the bush, and only think, there lay a fiddle and gun, all ready, just as if they had been ordered. these he gave to the servant, and then said to him, “whatever you may ask at any time, no man in the world shall be able to deny you.”
“heart alive! what can one desire more?” said the servant to himself, and went merrily onwards. soon afterwards he met a jew with a long goat’s-beard, who was standing listening to the song of a bird which was sitting up at the top of a tree. “good heavens,” he was exclaiming, “that such a small creature should have such a fearfully loud voice! if it were but mine! if only someone would sprinkle some salt upon its tail!”
“if that is all,” said the servant, “the bird shall soon be down here;”
and taking aim he pulled the trigger, and down fell the bird into the thorn-bushes. “go, you rogue,” he said to the jew, “and fetch the bird out for yourself!”
“oh!” said the jew, “leave out the rogue, my master, and i will do it at once. i will get the bird out for myself, as you really have hit it.” then he lay down on the ground, and began to crawl into the thicket.
when he was fast among the thorns, the good servant’s humor so tempted him that he took up his fiddle and began to play. in a moment the jew’s legs began to move, and to jump into the air, and the more the servant fiddled the better went the dance. but the thorns tore his shabby coat from him, combed his beard, and pricked and plucked him all over the body. “oh dear,” cried the jew, “what do i want with your fiddling?
leave the fiddle alone, master; i do not want to dance.”
but the servant did not listen to him, and thought, “you have fleeced people often enough, now the thorn-bushes shall do the same to you;”
and he began to play over again, so that the jew had to jump higher than ever, and scraps of his coat were left hanging on the thorns. “oh, woe’s me! cried the jew; i will give the gentleman whatsoever he asks if only he leaves off fiddling a purse full of gold.” “if you are so liberal,” said the servant, “i will stop my music; but this i must say to your credit, that you dance to it so well that it is quite an art;”
and having taken the purse he went his way.
the jew stood still and watched the servant quietly until he was far off and out of sight, and then he screamed out with all his might, “you miserable musician, you beer-house fiddler! wait till i catch you alone, i will hunt you till the soles of your shoes fall off! you ragamuffin! just put five farthings in your mouth, and then you may be worth three halfpence!” and went on abusing him as fast as he could speak. as soon as he had refreshed himself a little in this way, and got his breath again, he ran into the town to the justice.
“my lord judge,” he said, “i have come to make a complaint; see how a rascal has robbed and ill-treated me on the public highway! a stone on the ground might pity me; my clothes all torn, my body pricked and scratched, my little all gone with my purse, good ducats, each piece better than the last; for god’s sake let the man be thrown into prison!”
“was it a soldier,” said the judge, “who cut you thus with his sabre?”
“nothing of the sort!” said the jew; “it was no sword that he had, but a gun hanging at his back, and a fiddle at his neck; the wretch may easily be known.”
so the judge sent his people out after the man, and they found the good servant, who had been going quite slowly along, and they found, too, the purse with the money upon him. as soon as he was taken before the judge he said, “i did not touch the jew, nor take his money; he gave it to me of his own free will, that i might leave off fiddling because he could not bear my music.” “heaven defend us!” cried the jew, “his lies are as thick as flies upon the wall.”
but the judge also did not believe his tale, and said, “this is a bad defence, no jew would do that.” and because he had committed robbery on the public highway, he sentenced the good servant to be hanged. as he was being led away the jew again screamed after him, “you vagabond! you dog of a fiddler! now you are going to receive your well-earned reward!” the servant walked quietly with the hangman up the ladder, but upon the last step he turned round and said to the judge, “grant me just one request before i die.”
“yes, if you do not ask your life,” said the judge. “i do not ask for life,” answered the servant, “but as a last favor let me play once more upon my fiddle.” the jew raised a great cry of “murder! murder! for goodness’ sake do not allow it! do not allow it!” but the judge said, “why should i not let him have this short pleasure? it has been granted to him, and he shall have it.” however, he could not have refused on account of the gift which had been bestowed on the servant.
then the jew cried, “oh! woe’s me! tie me, tie me fast!” while the good servant took his fiddle from his neck, and made ready. as he gave the first scrape, they all began to quiver and shake, the judge, his clerk, and the hangman and his men, and the cord fell out of the hand of the one who was going to tie the jew fast. at the second scrape all raised their legs, and the hangman let go his hold of the good servant, and made himself ready to dance. at the third scrape they all leaped up and began to dance; the judge and the jew being the best at jumping. soon all who had gathered in the market-place out of curiosity were dancing with them; old and young, fat and lean, one with another. the dogs, likewise, which had run there got up on their hind legs and capered about; and the longer he played, the higher sprang the dancers, so that they knocked against each other’s heads, and began to shriek terribly.
at length the judge cried, quite out of breath, “i will give you your life if you will only stop fiddling.” the good servant thereupon had compassion, took his fiddle and hung it round his neck again, and stepped down the ladder. then he went up to the jew, who was lying upon the ground panting for breath, and said, “you rascal, now confess, whence you got the money, or i will take my fiddle and begin to play again.” “i stole it, i stole it!” cried he; “but you have honestly earned it.” so the judge had the jew taken to the gallows and hanged as a thief.
111 the skilful huntsman
there was once a young fellow who had learnt the trade of locksmith, and told his father he would now go out into the world and seek his fortune. “very well,” said the father, “i am quite content with that,”
and gave him some money for his journey. so he travelled about and looked for work. after a time he resolved not to follow the trade of locksmith any more, for he no longer liked it, but he took a fancy for hunting. then there met him in his rambles a huntsman dressed in green, who asked whence he came and whither he was going? the youth said he was a locksmith’s apprentice, but that the trade no longer pleased him, and he had a liking for huntsmanship, would he teach it to him? “oh, yes,” said the huntsman, “if thou wilt go with me.” then the young fellow went with him, bound himself to him for some years, and learnt the art of hunting. after this he wished to try his luck elsewhere, and the huntsman gave him nothing in the way of payment but an air-gun, which had, however, this property, that it hit its mark without fail whenever he shot with it. then he set out and found himself in a very large forest, which he could not get to the end of in one day. when evening came he seated himself in a high tree in order to escape from the wild beasts. towards midnight, it seemed to him as if a tiny little light glimmered in the distance. then he looked down through the branches towards it, and kept well in his mind where it was. but in the first place he took off his hat and threw it down in the direction of the light, so that he might go to the hat as a mark when he had descended. then he got down and went to his hat, put it on again and went straight forwards. the farther he went, the larger the light grew, and when he got close to it he saw that it was an enormous fire, and that three giants were sitting by it, who had an ox on the spit, and were roasting it. presently one of them said, “i must just taste if the meat will soon be fit to eat,” and pulled a piece off, and was about to put it in his mouth when the huntsman shot it out of his hand. “well, really,” said the giant, “if the wind has not blown the bit out of my hand!” and helped himself to another. but when he was just about to bite into it, the huntsman again shot it away from him. on this the giant gave the one who was sitting next him a box on the ear, and cried angrily, “why art thou snatching my piece away from me?” “i have not snatched it away,” said the other, “a sharpshooter must have shot it away from thee.” the giant took another piece, but could not, however, keep it in his hand, for the huntsman shot it out. then the giant said, “that must be a good shot to shoot the bit out of one’s very mouth, such an one would be useful to us.” and he cried aloud, “come here, thou sharpshooter, seat thyself at the fire beside us and eat thy fill, we will not hurt thee; but if thou wilt not come, and we have to bring thee by force, thou art a lost man!” on this the youth went up to them and told them he was a skilled huntsman, and that whatever he aimed at with his gun, he was certain to hit. then they said if he would go with them he should be well treated, and they told him that outside the forest there was a great lake, behind which stood a tower, and in the tower was imprisoned a lovely princess, whom they wished very much to carry off. “yes,” said he, “i will soon get her for you.” then they added, “but there is still something else, there is a tiny little dog, which begins to bark directly any one goes near, and as soon as it barks every one in the royal palace wakens up, and for this reason we cannot get there; canst thou undertake to shoot it dead?” “yes,” said he, “that will be a little bit of fun for me.” after this he got into a boat and rowed over the lake, and as soon as he landed, the little dog came running out, and was about to bark, but the huntsman took his air-gun and shot it dead. when the giants saw that, they rejoiced, and thought they already had the king’s daughter safe, but the huntsman wished first to see how matters stood, and told them that they must stay outside until he called them. then he went into the castle, and all was perfectly quiet within, and every one was asleep. when he opened the door of the first room, a sword was hanging on the wall which was made of pure silver, and there was a golden star on it, and the name of the king, and on a table near it lay a sealed letter which he broke open, and inside it was written that whosoever had the sword could kill everything which opposed him. so he took the sword from the wall, hung it at his side and went onwards: then he entered the room where the king’s daughter was lying sleeping, and she was so beautiful that he stood still and, holding his breath, looked at her. he thought to himself, “how can i give an innocent maiden into the power of the wild giants, who have evil in their minds?” he looked about further, and under the bed stood a pair of slippers, on the right one was her father’s name with a star, and on the left her own name with a star.
she wore also a great neck-kerchief of silk embroidered with gold, and on the right side was her father’s name, and on the left her own, all in golden letters. then the huntsman took a pair of scissors and cut the right corner off, and put it in his knapsack, and then he also took the right slipper with the king’s name, and thrust that in. now the maiden still lay sleeping, and she was quite sewn into her night-dress, and he cut a morsel from this also, and thrust it in with the rest, but he did all without touching her. then he went forth and left her lying asleep undisturbed, and when he came to the gate again, the giants were still standing outside waiting for him, and expecting that he was bringing the princess. but he cried to them that they were to come in, for the maiden was already in their power, that he could not open the gate to them, but there was a hole through which they must creep. then the first approached, and the huntsman wound the giant’s hair round his hand, pulled the head in, and cut it off at one stroke with his sword, and then drew the rest of him in. he called to the second and cut his head off likewise, and then he killed the third also, and he was well pleased that he had freed the beautiful maiden from her enemies, and he cut out their tongues and put them in his knapsack. then thought he, “i will go home to my father and let him see what i have already done, and afterwards i will travel about the world; the luck which god is pleased to grant me will easily find me.”
but when the king in the castle awoke, he saw the three giants lying there dead. so he went into the sleeping-room of his daughter, awoke her, and asked who could have killed the giants? then said she, “dear father, i know not, i have been asleep.” but when she arose and would have put on her slippers, the right one was gone, and when she looked at her neck-kerchief it was cut, and the right corner was missing, and when she looked at her night-dress a piece was cut out of it. the king summoned his whole court together, soldiers and every one else who was there, and asked who had set his daughter at liberty, and killed the giants? now it happened that he had a captain, who was one-eyed and a hideous man, and he said that he had done it. then the old king said that as he had accomplished this, he should marry his daughter. but the maiden said, “rather than marry him, dear father, i will go away into the world as far as my legs can carry me.” but the king said that if she would not marry him she should take off her royal garments and wear peasant’s clothing, and go forth, and that she should go to a potter, and begin a trade in earthen vessels. so she put off her royal apparel, and went to a potter and borrowed crockery enough for a stall, and she promised him also that if she had sold it by the evening, she would pay for it. then the king said she was to seat herself in a corner with it and sell it, and he arranged with some peasants to drive over it with their carts, so that everything should be broken into a thousand pieces. when therefore the king’s daughter had placed her stall in the street, by came the carts, and broke all she had into tiny fragments.
she began to weep and said, “alas, how shall i ever pay for the pots now?” the king had, however, wished by this to force her to marry the captain; but instead of that, she again went to the potter, and asked him if he would lend to her once more. he said, “no,” she must first pay for the things she had already had. then she went to her father and cried and lamented, and said she would go forth into the world. then said he, “i will have a little hut built for thee in the forest outside, and in it thou shalt stay all thy life long and cook for every one, but thou shalt take no money for it.” when the hut was ready, a sign was hung on the door whereon was written, “to-day given, to-morrow sold.” there she remained a long time, and it was rumored about the world that a maiden was there who cooked without asking for payment, and that this was set forth on a sign outside her door. the huntsman heard it likewise, and thought to himself, “that would suit thee. thou art poor, and hast no money.” so he took his air-gun and his knapsack, wherein all the things which he had formerly carried away with him from the castle as tokens of his truthfulness were still lying, and went into the forest, and found the hut with the sign, “to-day given, to-morrow sold.” he had put on the sword with which he had cut off the heads of the three giants, and thus entered the hut, and ordered something to eat to be given to him. he was charmed with the beautiful maiden, who was indeed as lovely as any picture. she asked him whence he came and whither he was going, and he said, “i am roaming about the world.” then she asked him where he had got the sword, for that truly her father’s name was on it. he asked her if she were the king’s daughter. “yes,” answered she. “with this sword,” said he, “did i cut off the heads of three giants.” and he took their tongues out of his knapsack in proof. then he also showed her the slipper, and the corner of the neck-kerchief, and the bit of the night-dress. hereupon she was overjoyed, and said that he was the one who had delivered her. on this they went together to the old king, and fetched him to the hut, and she led him into her room, and told him that the huntsman was the man who had really set her free from the giants. and when the aged king saw all the proofs of this, he could no longer doubt, and said that he was very glad he knew how everything had happened, and that the huntsman should have her to wife, on which the maiden was glad at heart. then she dressed the huntsman as if he were a foreign lord, and the king ordered a feast to be prepared. when they went to table, the captain sat on the left side of the king’s daughter, but the huntsman was on the right, and the captain thought he was a foreign lord who had come on a visit.
when they had eaten and drunk, the old king said to the captain that he would set before him something which he must guess. “supposing any one said that he had killed the three giants and he were asked where the giants’ tongues were, and he were forced to go and look, and there were none in their heads, how could that happen?” the captain said, “then they cannot have had any.” “not so,” said the king. “every animal has a tongue,” and then he likewise asked what any one would deserve who made such an answer? the captain replied, “he ought to be torn in pieces.”
then the king said he had pronounced his own sentence, and the captain was put in prison and then torn in four pieces; but the king’s daughter was married to the huntsman. after this he brought his father and mother, and they lived with their son in happiness, and after the death of the old king he received the kingdom.
112 the flail from heaven
a countryman was once going out to plough with a pair of oxen. when he got to the field, both the animals’ horns began to grow, and went on growing, and when he wanted to go home they were so big that the oxen could not get through the gateway for them. by good luck a butcher came by just then, and he delivered them over to him, and made the bargain in this way, that he should take the butcher a measure of turnip-seed, and then the butcher was to count him out a brabant thaler for every seed. i call that well sold! the peasant now went home, and carried the measure of turnip-seed to him on his back. on the way, however, he lost one seed out of the bag. the butcher paid him justly as agreed on, and if the peasant had not lost the seed, he would have had one thaler the more. in the meantime, when he went on his way back, the seed had grown into a tree which reached up to the sky. then thought the peasant, “as thou hast the chance, thou must just see what the angels are doing up there above, and for once have them before thine eyes.” so he climbed up, and saw that the angels above were threshing oats, and he looked on. while he was thus watching them, he observed that the tree on which he was standing, was beginning to totter; he peeped down, and saw that someone was just going to cut it down. “if i were to fall down from hence it would be a bad thing,” thought he, and in his necessity he did not know how to save himself better than by taking the chaff of the oats which lay there in heaps, and twisting a rope of it. he likewise snatched a hoe and a flail which were lying about in heaven, and let himself down by the rope. but he came down on the earth exactly in the middle of a deep, deep hole. so it was a real piece of luck that he had brought the hoe, for he hoed himself a flight of steps with it, and mounted up, and took the flail with him as a token of his truth, so that no one could have any doubt of his story.
113 the two kings’ children
there was once on a time a king who had a little boy of whom it had been foretold that he should be killed by a stag when he was sixteen years of age, and when he had reached that age the huntsmen once went hunting with him. in the forest, the king’s son was separated from the others, and all at once he saw a great stag which he wanted to shoot, but could not hit. at length he chased the stag so far that they were quite out of the forest, and then suddenly a great tall man was standing there instead of the stag, and said, “it is well that i have thee. i have already ruined six pairs of glass skates with running after thee, and have not been able to get thee.” then he took the king’s son with him, and dragged him through a great lake to a great palace, and then he had to sit down to table with him and eat something. when they had eaten something together the king said, “i have three daughters, thou must keep watch over the eldest for one night, from nine in the evening till six in the morning, and every time the clock strikes, i will come myself and call, and if thou then givest me no answer, to-morrow morning thou shall be put to death, but if thou always givest me an answer, thou shalt have her to wife.”
when the young folks went to the bed-room there stood a stone image of st. christopher, and the king’s daughter said to it, “my father will come at nine o’clock, and every hour till it strikes three; when he calls, give him an answer instead of the king’s son.” then the stone image of st. christopher nodded its head quite quickly, and then more and more slowly till at last it stood still. the next morning the king said to him, “thou hast done the business well, but i cannot give my daughter away. thou must now watch a night by my second daughter, and then i will consider with myself, whether thou canst have my eldest daughter to wife, but i shall come every hour myself, and when i call thee, answer me, and if i call thee and thou dost not reply, thy blood shall flow.” then they both went into the sleeping-room, and there stood a still larger stone image of st. christopher, and the king’s daughter said to it, “if my father calls, do you answer him.” then the great stone image of st. christopher again nodded its head quite quickly and then more and more slowly, until at last it stood still again. and the king’s son lay down on the threshold, put his hand under his head and slept. the next morning the king said to him, “thou hast done the business really well, but i cannot give my daughter away; thou must now watch a night by the youngest princess, and then i will consider with myself whether thou canst have my second daughter to wife, but i shall come every hour myself, and when i call thee answer me, and if i call thee and thou answerest not, thy blood shall flow for me.”
then they once more went to the sleeping-room together, and there was a much greater and much taller image of st. christopher than the two first had been. the king’s daughter said to it, “when my father calls, do thou answer.” then the great tall stone image of st. christopher nodded quite half an hour with its head, until at length the head stood still again. and the king’s son laid himself down on the threshold of the door and slept. the next morning the king said, “thou hast indeed watched well, but i cannot give thee my daughter now; i have a great forest, if thou cuttest it down for me between six o’clock this morning and six at night, i will think about it.” then he gave him a glass axe, a glass wedge, and a glass mallet. when he got into the wood, he began at once to cut, but the axe broke in two, then he took the wedge, and struck it once with the mallet, and it became as short and as small as sand. then he was much troubled and believed he would have to die, and sat down and wept.
now when it was noon the king said, “one of you girls must take him something to eat.” “no,” said the two eldest, “we will not take it to him; the one by whom he last watched, can take him something.” then the youngest was forced to go and take him something to eat. when she got into the forest, she asked him how he was getting on? “oh,” said he, “i am getting on very badly.” then she said he was to come and just eat a little. “nay,” said he, “i cannot do that, i shall still have to die, so i will eat no more.” then she spoke so kindly to him and begged him just to try, that he came and ate something. when he had eaten something she said, “i will comb thy hair a while, and then thou wilt feel happier.”
so she combed his hair, and he became weary and fell asleep, and then she took her handkerchief and made a knot in it, and struck it three times on the earth, and said, “earth-workers, come forth.” in a moment, numbers of little earth-men came forth, and asked what the king’s daughter commanded? then said she, “in three hours’ time the great forest must be cut down, and the whole of the wood laid in heaps.” so the little earth-men went about and got together the whole of their kindred to help them with the work. they began at once, and when the three hours were over, all was done, and they came back to the king’s daughter and told her so. then she took her white handkerchief again and said, “earth-workers, go home.” on this they all disappeared. when the king’s son awoke, he was delighted, and she said, “come home when it has struck six o’clock.” he did as she told him, and then the king asked, “hast thou made away with the forest?” “yes,” said the king’s son. when they were sitting at table, the king said, “i cannot yet give thee my daughter to wife, thou must still do something more for her sake.” so he asked what it was to be, then? “i have a great fish-pond,”
said the king. “thou must go to it to-morrow morning and clear it of all mud until it is as bright as a mirror, and fill it with every kind of fish.” the next morning the king gave him a glass shovel and said, “the fish-pond must be done by six o’clock.” so he went away, and when he came to the fish-pond he stuck his shovel in the mud and it broke in two, then he stuck his hoe in the mud, and broke it also. then he was much troubled. at noon the youngest daughter brought him something to eat, and asked him how he was getting on? so the king’s son said everything was going very ill with him, and he would certainly have to lose his head. “my tools have broken to pieces again.” “oh,” said she, “thou must just come and eat something, and then thou wilt be in another frame of mind.” “no,” said he, “i cannot eat, i am far too unhappy for that!” then she gave him many good words until at last he came and ate something. then she combed his hair again, and he fell asleep, so once more she took her handkerchief, tied a knot in it, and struck the ground thrice with the knot, and said, “earth-workers, come forth.” in a moment a great many little earth-men came and asked what she desired, and she told them that in three hours’ time, they must have the fish-pond entirely cleaned out, and it must be so clear that people could see themselves reflected in it, and every kind of fish must be in it. the little earth-men went away and summoned all their kindred to help them, and in two hours it was done. then they returned to her and said, “we have done as thou hast commanded.” the king’s daughter took the handkerchief and once more struck thrice on the ground with it, and said, “earth-workers, go home again.” then they all went away.
when the king’s son awoke the fish-pond was done. then the king’s daughter went away also, and told him that when it was six he was to come to the house. when he arrived at the house the king asked, “hast thou got the fish-pond done?” “yes,” said the king’s son. that was very good.
when they were again sitting at table the king said, “thou hast certainly done the fish-pond, but i cannot give thee my daughter yet; thou must just do one thing more.” “what is that, then?” asked the king’s son. the king said he had a great mountain on which there was nothing but briars which must all be cut down, and at the top of it the youth must build up a great castle, which must be as strong as could be conceived, and all the furniture and fittings belonging to a castle must be inside it. and when he arose next morning the king gave him a glass axe and a glass gimlet with him, and he was to have all done by six o’clock. as he was cutting down the first briar with the axe, it broke off short, and so small that the pieces flew all round about, and he could not use the gimlet either. then he was quite miserable, and waited for his dearest to see if she would not come and help him in his need. when it was mid-day she came and brought him something to eat. he went to meet her and told her all, and ate something, and let her comb his hair and fell asleep. then she once more took the knot and struck the earth with it, and said, “earth-workers, come forth!” then came once again numbers of earth-men, and asked what her desire was. then said she, “in the space of three hours they must cut down the whole of the briars, and a castle must be built on the top of the mountain that must be as strong as any one could conceive, and all the furniture that pertains to a castle must be inside it.” they went away, and summoned their kindred to help them and when the time was come, all was ready.
then they came to the king’s daughter and told her so, and the king’s daughter took her handkerchief and struck thrice on the earth with it, and said, “earth-workers, go home,” on which they all disappeared. when therefore the king’s son awoke and saw everything done, he was as happy as a bird in air.
when it had struck six, they went home together. then said the king, “is the castle ready?” “yes,” said the king’s son. when they sat down to table, the king said, “i cannot give away my youngest daughter until the two eldest are married.” then the king’s son and the king’s daughter were quite troubled, and the king’s son had no idea what to do. but he went by night to the king’s daughter and ran away with her.
when they had got a little distance away, the king’s daughter peeped round and saw her father behind her. “oh,” said she, “what are we to do? my father is behind us, and will take us back with him. i will at once change thee into a briar, and myself into a rose, and i will shelter myself in the midst of the bush.” when the father reached the place, there stood a briar with one rose on it, then he was about to gather the rose, when the thorn came and pricked his finger so that he was forced to go home again. his wife asked why he had not brought their daughter back with him? so he said he had nearly got up to her, but that all at once he had lost sight of her, and a briar with one rose was growing on the spot.
then said the queen, “if thou hadst but gathered the rose, the briar would have been forced to come too.” so he went back again to fetch the rose, but in the meantime the two were already far over the plain, and the king ran after them. then the daughter once more looked round and saw her father coming, and said, “oh, what shall we do now? i will instantly change thee into a church and myself into a priest, and i will stand up in the pulpit, and preach.” when the king got to the place, there stood a church, and in the pulpit was a priest preaching.
so he listened to the sermon, and then went home again.
then the queen asked why he had not brought their daughter with him, and he said, “nay, i ran a long time after her, and just as i thought i should soon overtake her, a church was standing there and a priest was in the pulpit preaching.” “thou shouldst just have brought the priest,”
said his wife, “and then the church would soon have come. it is no use to send thee, i must go there myself.” when she had walked for some time, and could see the two in the distance, the king’s daughter peeped round and saw her mother coming, and said, “now we are undone, for my mother is coming herself: i will immediately change thee into a fish-pond and myself into a fish.
when the mother came to the place, there was a large fish-pond, and in the midst of it a fish was leaping about and peeping out of the water, and it was quite merry. she wanted to catch the fish, but she could not. then she was very angry, and drank up the whole pond in order to catch the fish, but it made her so ill that she was forced to vomit, and vomited the whole pond out again. then she cried, “i see very well that nothing can be done now,” and said that now they might come back to her. then the king’s daughter went back again, and the queen gave her daughter three walnuts, and said, “with these thou canst help thyself when thou art in thy greatest need.” so the young folks went once more away together. and when they had walked quite ten miles, they arrived at the castle from whence the king’s son came, and close by it was a village. when they reached it, the king’s son said, “stay here, my dearest, i will just go to the castle, and then will i come with a carriage and with attendants to fetch thee.”
when he got to the castle they all rejoiced greatly at having the king’s son back again, and he told them he had a bride who was now in the village, and they must go with the carriage to fetch her. then they harnessed the horses at once, and many attendants seated themselves outside the carriage. when the king’s son was about to get in, his mother gave him a kiss, and he forgot everything which had happened, and also what he was about to do. on this his mother ordered the horses to be taken out of the carriage again, and everyone went back into the house. but the maiden sat in the village and watched and watched, and thought he would come and fetch her, but no one came. then the king’s daughter took service in the mill which belonged to the castle, and was obliged to sit by the pond every afternoon and clean the tubs.
and the queen came one day on foot from the castle, and went walking by the pond, and saw the well-grown maiden sitting there, and said, “what a fine strong girl that is! she pleases me well!” then she and all with her looked at the maid, but no one knew her. so a long time passed by during which the maiden served the miller honorably and faithfully. in the meantime, the queen had sought a wife for her son, who came from quite a distant part of the world. when the bride came, they were at once to be married. and many people hurried together, all of whom wanted to see everything. then the girl said to the miller that he might be so good as to give her leave to go also. so the miller said, “yes, do go there.” when she was about to go, she opened one of the three walnuts, and a beautiful dress lay inside it. she put it on, and went into the church and stood by the altar. suddenly came the bride and bridegroom, and seated themselves before the altar, and when the priest was just going to bless them, the bride peeped half round and saw the maiden standing there. then she stood up again, and said she would not be given away until she also had as beautiful a dress as that lady there. so they went back to the house again, and sent to ask the lady if she would sell that dress. no, she would not sell it, but the bride might perhaps earn it. then the bride asked her how she was to do this? then the maiden said if she might sleep one night outside the king’s son’s door, the bride might have what she wanted. so the bride said, “yes, she was willing to do that.” but the servants were ordered to give the king’s son a sleeping-drink, and then the maiden laid herself down on the threshold and lamented all night long. she had had the forest cut down for him, she had had the fish-pond cleaned out for him, she had had the castle built for him, she had changed him into a briar, and then into a church, and at last into a fish-pond, and yet he had forgotten her so quickly. the king’s son did not hear one word of it, but the servants had been awakened, and had listened to it, and had not known what it could mean. the next morning when they were all up, the bride put on the dress, and went away to the church with the bridegroom. in the meantime the maiden opened the second walnut, and a still more beautiful dress was inside it. she put it on, and went and stood by the altar in the church, and everything happened as it had happened the time before. and the maiden again lay all night on the threshold which led to the chamber of the king’s son, and the servant was once more to give him a sleeping-drink. the servant, however, went to him and gave him something to keep him awake, and then the king’s son went to bed, and the miller’s maiden bemoaned herself as before on the threshold of the door, and told of all that she had done. all this the king’s son heard, and was sore troubled, and what was past came back to him. then he wanted to go to her, but his mother had locked the door. the next morning, however, he went at once to his beloved, and told her everything which had happened to him, and prayed her not to be angry with him for having forgotten her. then the king’s daughter opened the third walnut, and within it was a still more magnificent dress, which she put on, and went with her bridegroom to church, and numbers of children came who gave them flowers, and offered them gay ribbons to bind about their feet, and they were blessed by the priest, and had a merry wedding. but the false mother and the bride had to depart. and the mouth of the person who last told all this is still warm.
114 the cunning little tailor
there was once on a time a princess who was extremely proud. if a wooer came she gave him some riddle to guess, and if he could not find it out, he was sent contemptuously away. she let it be made known also that whosoever solved her riddle should marry her, let him be who he might. at length, therefore, three tailors fell in with each other, the two eldest of whom thought they had done so many dexterous bits of work successfully that they could not fail to succeed in this also; the third was a little useless land-louper, who did not even know his trade, but thought he must have some luck in this venture, for where else was it to come from? then the two others said to him, “just stay at home; thou canst not do much with thy little bit of understanding.”
the little tailor, however, did not let himself be discouraged, and said he had set his head to work about this for once, and he would manage well enough, and he went forth as if the whole world were his.
they all three announced themselves to the princess, and said she was to propound her riddle to them, and that the right persons were now come, who had understandings so fine that they could be threaded in a needle. then said the princess, “i have two kinds of hair on my head, of what color is it?” “if that be all,” said the first, “it must be black and white, like the cloth which is called pepper and salt.” the princess said, “wrongly guessed; let the second answer.” then said the second, “if it be not black and white, then it is brown and red, like my father’s company coat.” “wrongly guessed,” said the princess, “let the third give the answer, for i see very well he knows it for certain.” then the little tailor stepped boldly forth and said, “the princess has a silver and a golden hair on her head, and those are the two different colors.” when the princess heard that, she turned pale and nearly fell down with terror, for the little tailor had guessed her riddle, and she had firmly believed that no man on earth could discover it. when her courage returned she said, “thou hast not won me yet by that; there is still something else that thou must do. below, in the stable is a bear with which thou shalt pass the night, and when i get up in the morning if thou art still alive, thou shalt marry me.” she expected, however, she should thus get rid of the tailor, for the bear had never yet left any one alive who had fallen into his clutches. the little tailor did not let himself be frightened away, but was quite delighted, and said, “boldly ventured is half won.”
when therefore the evening came, our little tailor was taken down to the bear. the bear was about to set at the little fellow at once, and give him a hearty welcome with his paws: “softly, softly,” said the little tailor, “i will soon make thee quiet.” then quite composedly, and as if he had not an anxiety in the world, he took some nuts out of his pocket, cracked them, and ate the kernels. when the bear saw that, he was seized with a desire to have some nuts too. the tailor felt in his pockets, and reached him a handful; they were, however, not nuts, but pebbles. the bear put them in his mouth, but could get nothing out of them, let him bite as he would. “eh!” thought he, “what a stupid blockhead i am! i cannot even crack a nut!” and then he said to the tailor, “here, crack me the nuts.” “there, see what a stupid fellow thou art!” said the little tailor, “to have such a great mouth, and not be able to crack a small nut!” then he took the pebble and nimbly put a nut in his mouth in the place of it, and crack, it was in two! “i must try the thing again,” said the bear; “when i watch you, i then think i ought to be able to do it too.” so the tailor once more gave him a pebble, and the bear tried and tried to bite into it with all the strength of his body. but no one will imagine that he accomplished it.
when that was over, the tailor took out a violin from beneath his coat, and played a piece of it to himself. when the bear heard the music, he could not help beginning to dance, and when he had danced a while, the thing pleased him so well that he said to the little tailor, “hark you, is the fiddle heavy?” “light enough for a child. look, with the left hand i lay my fingers on it, and with the right i stroke it with the bow, and then it goes merrily, hop sa sa vivallalera!” “so,” said the bear; “fiddling is a thing i should like to understand too, that i might dance whenever i had a fancy. what dost thou think of that? wilt thou give me lessons?” “with all my heart,” said the tailor, “if thou hast a talent for it. but just let me see thy claws, they are terribly long, i must cut thy nails a little.” then a vise was brought, and the bear put his claws in it, and the little tailor screwed it tight, and said, “now wait until i come with the scissors,” and he let the bear growl as he liked, and lay down in the corner on a bundle of straw, and fell asleep.
when the princess heard the bear growling so fiercely during the night, she believed nothing else but that he was growling for joy, and had made an end of the tailor. in the morning she arose careless and happy, but when she peeped into the stable, the tailor stood gaily before her, and was as healthy as a fish in water. now she could not say another word against the wedding because she had given a promise before every one, and the king ordered a carriage to be brought in which she was to drive to church with the tailor, and there she was to be married. when they had got into the carriage, the two other tailors, who had false hearts and envied him his good fortune, went into the stable and unscrewed the bear again. the bear in great fury ran after the carriage. the princess heard him snorting and growling; she was terrified, and she cried, “ah, the bear is behind us and wants to get thee!” the tailor was quick and stood on his head, stuck his legs out of the window, and cried, “dost thou see the vise? if thou dost not be off thou shalt be put into it again.” when the bear saw that, he turned round and ran away. the tailor drove quietly to church, and the princess was married to him at once, and he lived with her as happy as a woodlark. whosoever does not believe this, must pay a thaler.
115 the bright sun brings it to light
a tailor’s apprentice was travelling about the world in search of work, and at one time he could find none, and his poverty was so great that he had not a farthing to live on. presently he met a jew on the road, and as he thought he would have a great deal of money about him, the tailor thrust god out of his heart, fell on the jew, and said, “give me thy money, or i will strike thee dead.” then said the jew, “grant me my life, i have no money but eight farthings.” but the tailor said, “money thou hast; and it shall be produced,” and used violence and beat him until he was near death. and when the jew was dying, the last words he said were, “the bright sun will bring it to light,” and thereupon he died. the tailor’s apprentice felt in his pockets and sought for money, but he found nothing but eight farthings, as the jew had said. then he took him up and carried him behind a clump of trees, and went onwards to seek work. after he had traveled about a long while, he got work in a town with a master who had a pretty daughter, with whom he fell in love, and he married her, and lived in good and happy wedlock.
after a long time when he and his wife had two children, the wife’s father and mother died, and the young people kept house alone. one morning, when the husband was sitting on the table before the window, his wife brought him his coffee, and when he had poured it out into the saucer, and was just going to drink, the sun shone on it and the reflection gleamed hither and thither on the wall above, and made circles on it. then the tailor looked up and said, “yes, it would like very much to bring it to light, and cannot!” the woman said, “oh, dear husband, and what is that, then?” “what dost thou mean by that?” he answered, “i must not tell thee.” but she said, “if thou lovest me, thou must tell me,” and used her most affectionate words, and said that no one should ever know it, and left him no rest. then he told her how years ago, when he was travelling about seeking work and quite worn out and penniless, he had killed a jew, and that in the last agonies of death, the jew had spoken the words, “the bright sun will bring it to light.” and now, the sun had just wanted to bring it to light, and had gleamed and made circles on the wall, but had not been able to do it.
after this, he again charged her particularly never to tell this, or he would lose his life, and she did promise. when however, he had sat down to work again, she went to her great friend and confided the story to her, but she was never to repeat it to any human being, but before two days were over, the whole town knew it, and the tailor was brought to trial, and condemned. and thus, after all, the bright sun did bring it to light.
116 the blue light
there was once on a time a soldier who for many years had served the king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer because of the many wounds which he had received. the king said to him, “thou mayst return to thy home, i need thee no longer, and thou wilt not receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me service for them.” then the soldier did not know how to earn a living, went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the evening he entered a forest. when darkness came on, he saw a light, which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch. “do give me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,” said he to her, “or i shall starve.” “oho!” she answered, “who gives anything to a run-away soldier? yet will i be compassionate, and take you in, if you will do what i wish.” “what do you wish?” said the soldier. “that you should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.” the soldier consented, and next day labored with all his strength, but could not finish it by the evening. “i see well enough,” said the witch, “that you can do no more to-day, but i will keep you yet another night, in payment for which you must to-morrow chop me a load of wood, and make it small.” the soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch proposed that he should stay one night more.
“to-morrow, you shall only do me a very trifling piece of work. behind my house, there is an old dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and never goes out, and you shall bring it up again for me.” next day the old woman took him to the well, and let him down in a basket. he found the blue light, and made her a signal to draw him up again. she did draw him up, but when he came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the blue light away from him. “no,” said he, perceiving her evil intention, “i will not give thee the light until i am standing with both feet upon the ground.” the witch fell into a passion, let him down again into the well, and went away.
the poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? he saw very well that he could not escape death. he sat for a while very sorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which was still half full. “this shall be my last pleasure,”
thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke.
when the smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood before him, and said, “lord, what are thy commands?” “what commands have i to give thee?” replied the soldier, quite astonished.
“i must do everything thou biddest me,” said the little man. “good,”
said the soldier; “then in the first place help me out of this well.”
the little man took him by the hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget to take the blue light with him. on the way the dwarf showed him the treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry.
when he was above, he said to the little man, “now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before the judge.” in a short time she, with frightful cries, came riding by, as swift as the wind on a wild tom-cat, nor was it long after that before the little man re-appeared.
“it is all done,” said he, “and the witch is already hanging on the gallows. what further commands has my lord?” inquired the dwarf. “at this moment, none,” answered the soldier; “thou canst return home, only be at hand immediately, if i summon thee.” “nothing more is needed than that thou shouldst light thy pipe at the blue light, and i will appear before thee at once.” thereupon he vanished from his sight.
the soldier returned to the town from which he had come. he went to the best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord furnish him a room as handsomely as possible. when it was ready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black mannikin and said, “i have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me, and left me to hunger, and now i want to take my revenge.” “what am i to do?” asked the little man. “late at night, when the king’s daughter is in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for me.” the mannikin said, “that is an easy thing for me to do, but a very dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.” when twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the mannikin carried in the princess. “aha! art thou there?” cried the soldier, “get to thy work at once! fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.” when she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he stretched out his feet and said, “pull off my boots for me,” and then he threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean and brighten them. she, however, did everything he bade her, without opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes. when the first cock crowed, the mannikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her in her bed.
next morning when the princess arose, she went to her father, and told him that she had had a very strange dream. “i was carried through the streets with the rapidity of lightning,” said she, “and taken into a soldier’s room, and i had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. it was only a dream, and yet i am just as tired as if i really had done everything.”
“the dream may have been true,” said the king, “i will give thee a piece of advice. fill thy pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in it, and then if thou art carried away again, they will fall out and leave a track in the streets.” but unseen by the king, the mannikin was standing beside him when he said that, and heard all. at night when the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the crafty mannikin had just before scattered peas in every street there was. and again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until cock-crow.
next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it was all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting, picking up peas, and saying, “it must have rained peas, last night.” “we must think of something else,” said the king; “keep thy shoes on when thou goest to bed, and before thou comest back from the place where thou art taken, hide one of them there, i will soon contrive to find it.” the black mannikin heard this plot, and at night when the soldier again ordered him to bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told him that he knew of no expedient to counteract this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him.
“do what i bid thee,” replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under the bed.
next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s shoe. it was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back, and thrown into prison. in his flight he had forgotten the most valuable things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in his pocket. and now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. the soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to him, “be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle i have left lying in the inn, and i will give you a ducat for doing it.”
his comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted. as soon as the soldier was alone again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black mannikin. “have no fear,” said the latter to his master. “go wheresoever they take you, and let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.” next day the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge condemned him to death. when he was led forth to die, he begged a last favor of the king. “what is it?”
asked the king. “that i may smoke one more pipe on my way.” “thou mayst smoke three,” answered the king, “but do not imagine that i will spare thy life.” then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths of smoke had ascended, the mannikin was there with a small cudgel in his hand, and said, “what does my lord command?” “strike down to earth that false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has treated me so ill.”
then the mannikin fell on them like lightning, darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched by his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again. the king was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and the princess to wife.
117 the wilful child
once upon a time there was a child who was willful, and would not do at her mother wished. for this reason god had no pleasure in her, and let her become ill, and no doctor could do her any good, and in a short time she lay on her death-bed. when she had been lowered into her grave, and the earth was spread over her, all at once her arm came out again, and stretched upwards, and when they had put it in and spread fresh earth over it, it was all to no purpose, for the arm always came out again. then the mother herself was obliged to go to the grave, and strike the arm with a rod, and when she had done that, it was drawn in, and then at last the child had rest beneath the ground.
118 the three army-surgeons
three army-surgeons who thought they knew their art perfectly, were travelling about the world, and they came to an inn where they wanted to pass the night. the host asked whence they came, and whither they were going? “we are roaming about the world and practising our art.”
“just show me for once in a way what you can do,” said the host. then the first said he would cut off his hand, and put it on again early next morning; the second said he would tear out his heart, and replace it next morning; the third said he would cut out his eyes and heal them again next morning. “if you can do that,” said the innkeeper, “you have learnt everything.” they, however, had a salve, with which they rubbed themselves, which joined parts together, and they carried the little bottle in which it was, constantly with them. then they cut the hand, heart and eyes from their bodies as they had said they would, and laid them all together on a plate, and gave it to the innkeeper. the innkeeper gave it to a servant who was to set it in the cupboard, and take good care of it. the girl, however, had a lover in secret, who was a soldier. when therefore the innkeeper, the three army-surgeons, and everyone else in the house were asleep, the soldier came and wanted something to eat. the girl opened the cupboard and brought him some food, and in her love forgot to shut the cupboard-door again; she seated herself at the table by her lover, and they chattered away together. while she sat so contentedly there, thinking of no ill luck, the cat came creeping in, found the cupboard open, took the hand and heart and eyes of the three army-surgeons, and ran off with them. when the soldier had done eating, and the girl was taking away the things and going to shut the cupboard she saw that the plate which the innkeeper had given her to take care of, was empty. then she said in a fright to her lover, “ah, miserable girl, what shall i do? the hand is gone, the heart and the eyes are gone too, what will become of me in the morning?” “be easy,” said he, “i will help thee out of thy trouble there is a thief hanging outside on the gallows, i will cut off his hand. which hand was it?” “the right one.” then the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he went and cut the poor sinner’s right hand off, and brought it to her. after this he caught the cat and cut its eyes out, and now nothing but the heart was wanting. “have you not been killing, and are not the dead pigs in the cellar?” said he. “yes,” said the girl. “that’s well,” said the soldier, and he went down and fetched a pig’s heart. the girl placed all together on the plate, and put it in the cupboard, and when after this her lover took leave of her, she went quietly to bed.
in the morning when the three army-surgeons got up, they told the girl she was to bring them the plate on which the hand, heart, and eyes were lying. then she brought it out of the cupboard, and the first fixed the thief’s hand on and smeared it with his salve, and it grew to his arm directly. the second took the cat’s eyes and put them in his own head.
the third fixed the pig’s heart firm in the place where his own had been, and the innkeeper stood by, admired their skill, and said he had never yet seen such a thing as that done, and would sing their praises and recommend them to everyone. then they paid their bill, and travelled farther.
as they were on their way, the one with the pig’s heart did not stay with them at all, but wherever there was a corner he ran to it, and rooted about in it with his nose as pigs do. the others wanted to hold him back by the tail of his coat, but that did no good; he tore himself loose, and ran wherever the dirt was thickest. the second also behaved very strangely; he rubbed his eyes, and said to the others, “comrades, what is the matter? i don’t see at all. will one of you lead me, so that i do not fall.” then with difficulty they travelled on till evening, when they reached another inn. they went into the bar together, and there at a table in the corner sat a rich man counting money. the one with the thief’s hand walked round about him, made a sudden movement twice with his arm, and at last when the stranger turned away, he snatched at the pile of money, and took a handful from it. one of them saw this, and said, “comrade, what art thou about? thou must not steal shame on thee!” “eh,” said he, “but how can i stop myself? my hand twitches, and i am forced to snatch things whether i will or not.”
after this, they lay down to sleep, and while they were lying there it was so dark that no one could see his own hand. all at once the one with the cat’s eyes awoke, aroused the others, and said. “brothers, just look up, do you see the white mice running about there?” the two sat up, but could see nothing. then said he, “things are not right with us, we have not got back again what is ours. we must return to the innkeeper, he has deceived us.” they went back therefore, the next morning, and told the host they had not got what was their own again; that the first had a thief’s hand, the second cat’s eyes, and the third a pig’s heart. the innkeeper said that the girl must be to blame for that, and was going to call her, but when she had seen the three coming, she had run out by the backdoor, and not come back. then the three said he must give them a great deal of money, or they would set his house on fire. he gave them what he had, and whatever he could get together, and the three went away with it. it was enough for the rest of their lives, but they would rather have had their own proper organs.
119 the seven swabians
seven swabians were once together. the first was master schulz; the second, jackli; the third, marli; the fourth, jergli; the fifth, michal; the sixth, hans; the seventh, veitli: all seven had made up their minds to travel about the world to seek adventures, and perform great deeds. but in order that they might go in security and with arms in their hands, they thought it would be advisable that they should have one solitary, but very strong, and very long spear made for them.
this spear all seven of them took in their hands at once; in front walked the boldest and bravest, and that was master schulz; all the others followed in a row, and veitli was the last. then it came to pass one day in the hay-making month (july), when they had walked a long distance, and still had a long way to go before they reached the village where they were to pass the night, that as they were in a meadow in the twilight a great beetle or hornet flew by them from behind a bush, and hummed in a menacing manner. master schulz was so terrified that he all but dropped the spear, and a cold perspiration broke out over his whole body. “hark! hark!” cried he to his comrades, “good heavens! i hear a drum.” jackli, who was behind him holding the spear, and who perceived some kind of a smell, said, “something is most certainly going on, for i taste powder and matches.” at these words master schulz began to take to flight, and in a trice jumped over a hedge, but as he just happened to jump on to the teeth of a rake which had been left lying there after the hay-making, the handle of it struck against his face and gave him a tremendous blow. “oh dear! oh dear!”
screamed master schulz. “take me prisoner; i surrender! i surrender!”
the other six all leapt over, one on the top of the other, crying, “if you surrender, i surrender too! if you surrender, i surrender too!” at length, as no enemy was there to bind and take them away, they saw that they had been mistaken, and in order that the story might not be known, and they be treated as fools and ridiculed, they all swore to each other to hold their peace about it until one of them accidentally spoke of it. then they journeyed onwards. the second danger which they survived cannot be compared with the first. some days afterwards, their path led them through a fallow-field where a hare was sitting sleeping in the sun. her ears were standing straight up, and her great glassy eyes were wide open. all of them were alarmed at the sight of the horrible wild beast, and they consulted together as to what it would be the least dangerous to do. for if they were to run away, they knew that the monster would pursue and swallow them whole. so they said, “we must go through a great and dangerous struggle. boldly ventured, is half won,” and all seven grasped the spear, master schulz in front, and veitli behind. master schulz was always trying to keep the spear back, but veitli had become quite brave while behind, and wanted to dash forward and cried,
“strike home, in every swabian’s name, or else i wish ye may be lame.”
but hans knew how to meet this, and said,
“thunder and lightning, it’s fine to prate, but for dragon-hunting thou’rt aye too late.”
michal cried,
“nothing is wanting, not even a hair, be sure the devil himself is there.”
then it was jergli’s turn to speak,
“if it be not, it’s at least his mother, or else it’s the devil’s own step-brother.”
and now marli had a bright thought, and said to veitli,
“advance, veitli, advance, advance, and i behind will hold the lance.”
veitli, however, did not attend to that, and jackli said,
“tis schulz’s place the first to be, no one deserves that honor but he.”
then master schulz plucked up his courage, and said, gravely,
“then let us boldly advance to the fight, and thus we shall show our valour and might.”
hereupon they all together set on the dragon. master schulz crossed himself and prayed for god’s assistance, but as all this was of no avail, and he was getting nearer and nearer to the enemy, he screamed “oho! oho! ho! ho! ho!” in the greatest anguish. this awakened the hare, which in great alarm darted swiftly away. when master schulz saw her thus flying from the field of battle, he cried in his joy.
“quick, veitli, quick, look there, look there, the monster’s nothing but a hare!”
but the swabian allies went in search of further adventures, and came to the moselle, a mossy, quiet, deep river, over which there are few bridges, and which in many places people have to cross in boats. as the seven swabians did not know this, they called to a man who was working on the opposite side of the river, to know how people contrived to get across. the distance and their way of speaking made the man unable to understand what they wanted, and he said “what? what?” in the way people speak in the neighborhood of treves. master schulz thought he was saying, “wade, wade through the water,” and as he was the first, began to set out and went into the moselle. it was not long before he sank in the mud and the deep waves which drove against him, but his hat was blown on the opposite shore by the wind, and a frog sat down beside it, and croaked “wat, wat, wat.” the other six on the opposite side heard that, and said, “oho, comrades, master schulz is calling us; if he can wade across, why cannot we?” so they all jumped into the water together in a great hurry, and were drowned, and thus one frog took the lives of all six of them, and not one of the swabian allies ever reached home again.
120 the three apprentices
there were once three apprentices, who had agreed to keep always together while travelling, and always to work in the same town. at one time, however, their masters had no more work to give them, so that at last they were in rags, and had nothing to live on. then one of them said, “what shall we do? we cannot stay here any longer, we will travel once more, and if we do not find any work in the town we go to, we will arrange with the innkeeper there, that we are to write and tell him where we are staying, so that we can always have news of each other, and then we will separate.” and that seemed best to the others also.
they went forth, and met on the way a richly-dressed man who asked who they were. “we are apprentices looking for work; up to this time we have kept together, but if we cannot find anything to do we are going to separate.” “there is no need for that,” said the man, “if you will do what i tell you, you shall not want for gold or for work; nay, you shall become great lords, and drive in your carriages!” one of them said, “if our souls and salvation be not endangered, we will certainly do it.” “they will not,” replied the man, “i have no claim on you.” one of the others had, however, looked at his feet, and when he saw a horse’s foot and a man’s foot, he did not want to have anything to do with him. the devil, however, said, “be easy, i have no designs on you, but on another soul, which is half my own already, and whose measure shall but run full.” as they were now secure, they consented, and the devil told them what he wanted. the first was to answer, “all three of us,” to every question; the second was to say, “for money,” and the third, “and quite right too!” they were always to say this, one after the other, but they were not to say one word more, and if they disobeyed this order, all their money would disappear at once, but so long as they observed it, their pockets would always be full. as a beginning, he at once gave them as much as they could carry, and told them to go to such and such an inn when they got to the town. they went to it, and the innkeeper came to meet them, and asked if they wished for anything to eat? the first replied, “all three of us.” “yes,” said the host, “that is what i mean.” the second said, “for money.” “of course,” said the host. the third said, “and quite right too!”
“certainly it is right,” said the host.
good meat and drink were now brought to them, and they were well waited on. after the dinner came the payment, and the innkeeper gave the bill to the one who said, “all three of us,” the second said, “for money,”
and the third, “and quite right too!” “indeed it is right,” said the host, “all three pay, and without money i can give nothing.” they, however, paid still more than he had asked. the lodgers, who were looking on, said, “these people must be mad.” “yes, indeed they are,”
said the host, “they are not very wise.” so they stayed some time in the inn, and said nothing else but, “all three of us,” “for money,” and “and quite right too!” but they saw and knew all that was going on. it so happened that a great merchant came with a large sum of money, and said, “sir host, take care of my money for me, here are three crazy apprentices who might steal it from me.” the host did as he was asked.
as he was carrying the trunk into his room, he felt that it was heavy with gold. thereupon he gave the three apprentices a lodging below, but the merchant came up-stairs into a separate apartment. when it was midnight, and the host thought that all were asleep, he came with his wife, and they had an axe and struck the rich merchant dead; and after they had murdered him they went to bed again. when it was day there was a great outcry; the merchant lay dead in bed bathed in blood. all the guests ran at once but the host said, “the three crazy apprentices have done this;” the lodgers confirmed it, and said, “it can have been no one else.” the innkeeper, however, had them called, and said to them, “have you killed the merchant?” “all three of us,” said the first, “for money,” said the second; and the third added, “and quite right too!”
“there now, you hear,” said the host, “they confess it themselves.”
they were taken to prison, therefore, and were to be tried. when they saw that things were going so seriously, they were after all afraid, but at night the devil came and said, “bear it just one day longer, and do not play away your luck, not one hair of your head shall be hurt.”
the next morning they were led to the bar, and the judge said, “are you the murderers?” “all three of us.” “why did you kill the merchant?”
“for money.” “you wicked wretches, you have no horror of your sins?”
“and quite right too!” “they have confessed, and are still stubborn,”
said the judge, “lead them to death instantly.” so they were taken out, and the host had to go with them into the circle. when they were taken hold of by the executioner’s men, and were just going to be led up to the scaffold where the headsman was standing with naked sword, a coach drawn by four blood-red chestnut horses came up suddenly, driving so fast that fire flashed from the stones, and someone made signs from the window with a white handkerchief. then said the headsman, “it is a pardon coming,” and “pardon! pardon!” was called from the carriage also. then the devil stepped out as a very noble gentleman, beautifully dressed, and said, “you three are innocent; you may now speak, make known what you have seen and heard.” then said the eldest, “we did not kill the merchant, the murderer is standing there in the circle,” and he pointed to the innkeeper. “in proof of this, go into his cellar, where many others whom he has killed are still hanging.” then the judge sent the executioner’s men thither, and they found it was as the apprentices said, and when they had informed the judge of this, he caused the innkeeper to be led up, and his head was cut off. then said the devil to the three, “now i have got the soul which i wanted to have, and you are free, and have money for the rest of your lives.”
121 the king’s son who feared nothing
there was once a king’s son, who was no longer content to stay at home in his father’s house, and as he had no fear of anything, he thought, “i will go forth into the wide world, there the time will not seem long to me, and i shall see wonders enough.” so he took leave of his parents, and went forth, and on and on from morning till night, and whichever way his path led it was the same to him. it came to pass that he got to the house of a giant, and as he was so tired he sat down by the door and rested. and as he let his eyes roam here and there, he saw the giant’s playthings lying in the yard. these were a couple of enormous balls, and nine-pins as tall as a man. after a while he had a fancy to set the nine-pins up and then rolled the balls at them, and screamed and cried out when the nine-pins fell, and had a merry time of it. the giant heard the noise, stretched his head out of the window, and saw a man who was not taller than other men, and yet played with his nine-pins. “little worm,” cried he, “why art thou playing with my balls? who gave thee strength to do it?” the king’s son looked up, saw the giant, and said, “oh, thou blockhead, thou thinkest indeed that thou only hast strong arms, i can do everything i want to do.” the giant came down and watched the bowling with great admiration, and said, “child of man, if thou art one of that kind, go and bring me an apple of the tree of life.” “what dost thou want with it?” said the king’s son. “i do not want the apple for myself,” answered the giant, “but i have a betrothed bride who wishes for it. i have travelled far about the world and cannot find the tree.” “i will soon find it,” said the king’s son, “and i do not know what is to prevent me from getting the apple down.” the giant said, “thou really believest it to be so easy! the garden in which the tree stands is surrounded by an iron railing, and in front of the railing lie wild beasts, each close to the other, and they keep watch and let no man go in.” “they will be sure to let me in,” said the king’s son. “yes, but even if thou dost get into the garden, and seest the apple hanging to the tree, it is still not thine; a ring hangs in front of it, through which any one who wants to reach the apple and break it off, must put his hand, and no one has yet had the luck to do it.” “that luck will be mine,” said the king’s son.
then he took leave of the giant, and went forth over mountain and valley, and through plains and forests, until at length he came to the wondrous garden.
the beasts lay round about it, but they had put their heads down and were asleep. moreover, they did not awake when he went up to them, so he stepped over them, climbed the fence, and got safely into the garden. there, in the very middle of it, stood the tree of life, and the red apples were shining upon the branches. he climbed up the trunk to the top, and as he was about to reach out for an apple, he saw a ring hanging before it; but he thrust his hand through that without any difficulty, and gathered the apple. the ring closed tightly on his arm, and all at once he felt a prodigious strength flowing through his veins. when he had come down again from the tree with the apple, he would not climb over the fence, but grasped the great gate, and had no need to shake it more than once before it sprang open with a loud crash. then he went out, and the lion which had been lying down before, was awake and sprang after him, not in rage and fierceness, but following him humbly as its master.
the king’s son took the giant the apple he had promised him, and said, “seest thou, i have brought it without difficulty.” the giant was glad that his desire had been so soon satisfied, hastened to his bride, and gave her the apple for which she had wished. she was a beautiful and wise maiden, and as she did not see the ring on his arm, she said, “i shall never believe that thou hast brought the apple, until i see the ring on thine arm.” the giant said, “i have nothing to do but go home and fetch it,” and thought it would be easy to take away by force from the weak man, what he would not give of his own free will. he therefore demanded the ring from him, but the king’s son refused it. “where the apple is, the ring must be also,” said the giant; “if thou wilt not give it of thine own accord, thou must fight with me for it.”
they wrestled with each other for a long time, but the giant could not get the better of the king’s son, who was strengthened by the magical power of the ring. then the giant thought of a stratagem, and said, “i have got warm with fighting, and so hast thou. we will bathe in the river, and cool ourselves before we begin again.” the king’s son, who knew nothing of falsehood, went with him to the water, and pulled off with his clothes the ring also from his arm, and sprang into the river.
the giant instantly snatched the ring, and ran away with it, but the lion, which had observed the theft, pursued the giant, tore the ring out of his hand, and brought it back to its master. then the giant placed himself behind an oak-tree, and while the king’s son was busy putting on his clothes again, surprised him, and put both his eyes out.
and now the unhappy king’s son stood there, and was blind and knew not how to help himself. then the giant came back to him, took him by the hand as if he were someone who wanted to guide him, and led him to the top of a high rock. there he left him standing, and thought, “just two steps more, and he will fall down and kill himself, and i can take the ring from him.” but the faithful lion had not deserted its master; it held him fast by the clothes, and drew him gradually back again. when the giant came and wanted to rob the dead man, he saw that his cunning had been in vain. “is there no way, then, of destroying a weak child of man like that?” said he angrily to himself, and seized the king’s son and led him back again to the precipice by another way, but the lion which saw his evil design, helped its master out of danger here also.
when they had got close to the edge, the giant let the blind man’s hand drop, and was going to leave him behind alone, but the lion pushed the giant so that he was thrown down and fell, dashed to pieces, on the ground.
the faithful animal again drew its master back from the precipice, and guided him to a tree by which flowed a clear brook. the king’s son sat down there, but the lion lay down, and sprinkled the water in his face with its paws. scarcely had a couple of drops wetted the sockets of his eyes, than he was once more able to see something, and remarked a little bird flying quite close by, which wounded itself against the trunk of a tree. on this it went down to the water and bathed itself therein, and then it soared upwards and swept between the trees without touching them, as if it had recovered its sight again. then the king’s son recognized a sign from god and stooped down to the water, and washed and bathed his face in it. and when he arose he had his eyes once more, brighter and clearer than they had ever been.
the king’s son thanked god for his great mercy, and travelled with his lion onwards through the world. and it came to pass that he arrived before a castle which was enchanted. in the gateway stood a maiden of beautiful form and fine face, but she was quite black. she spoke to him and said, “ah, if thou couldst but deliver me from the evil spell which is thrown over me.” “what shall i do?” said the king’s son. the maiden answered, “thou must pass three nights in the great hall of this enchanted castle, but thou must let no fear enter thy heart. when they are doing their worst to torment thee, if thou bearest it without letting a sound escape thee, i shall be free. thy life they dare not take.” then said the king’s son, “i have no fear; with god’s help i will try it.” so he went gaily into the castle, and when it grew dark he seated himself in the large hall and waited. everything was quiet, however, till midnight, when all at once a great tumult began, and out of every hole and corner came little devils. they behaved as if they did not see him, seated themselves in the middle of the room, lighted a fire, and began to gamble. when one of them lost, he said, “it is not right; some one is here who does not belong to us; it is his fault that i am losing.” “wait, you fellow behind the stove, i am coming,” said another. the screaming became still louder, so that no one could have heard it without terror. the king’s son stayed sitting quite quietly, and was not afraid; but at last the devils jumped up from the ground, and fell on him, and there were so many of them that he could not defend himself from them. they dragged him about on the floor, pinched him, pricked him, beat him, and tormented him, but no sound escaped from him. towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted that he could scarcely move his limbs, but when day dawned the black maiden came to him. she bore in her hand a little bottle wherein was the water of life wherewith she washed him, and he at once felt all pain depart and new strength flow through his veins. she said, “thou hast held out successfully for one night, but two more lie before thee.” then she went away again, and as she was going, he observed that her feet had become white. the next night the devils came and began their gambols anew. they fell on the king’s son, and beat him much more severely than the night before, until his body was covered with wounds.
but as he bore all quietly, they were forced to leave him, and when dawn appeared, the maiden came and healed him with the water of life.
and when she went away, he saw with joy that she had already become white to the tips of her fingers. and now he had only one night more to go through, but it was the worst. the hob-goblins came again: “art thou there still?” cried they, “thou shalt be tormented till thy breath stops.” they pricked him and beat him, and threw him here and there, and pulled him by the arms and legs as if they wanted to tear him to pieces, but he bore everything, and never uttered a cry. at last the devils vanished, but he lay fainting there, and did not stir, nor could he raise his eyes to look at the maiden who came in, and sprinkled and bathed him with the water of life. but suddenly he was freed from all pain, and felt fresh and healthy as if he had awakened from sleep, and when he opened his eyes he saw the maiden standing by him, snow-white, and fair as day. “rise,” said she, “and swing thy sword three times over the stairs, and then all will be delivered.” and when he had done that, the whole castle was released from enchantment, and the maiden was a rich king’s daughter. the servants came and said that the table was already set in the great hall, and dinner served up. then they sat down and ate and drank together, and in the evening the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings.
122 donkey cabbages
there was once a young huntsman who went into the forest to lie in wait. he had a fresh and joyous heart, and as he was going thither, whistling upon a leaf, an ugly old crone came up, who spoke to him and said, “good-day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry and contented, but i am suffering from hunger and thirst, do give me an alms.” the huntsman had compassion on the poor old creature, felt in his pocket, and gave her what he could afford. he was then about to go further, but the old woman stopped him and said, “listen, dear huntsman, to what i tell you; i will make you a present in return for your kindness. go on your way now, but in a little while you will come to a tree, whereon nine birds are sitting which have a cloak in their claws, and are plucking at it; take your gun and shoot into the midst of them, they will let the cloak fall down to you, but one of the birds will be hurt, and will drop down dead. carry away the cloak, it is a wishing-cloak; when you throw it over your shoulders, you only have to wish to be in a certain place, and you will be there in the twinkling of an eye. take out the heart of the dead bird and swallow it whole, and every morning early, when you get up, you will find a gold piece under your pillow.”
the huntsman thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself, “those are fine things that she has promised me, if all does but come true.” and verily when he had walked about a hundred paces, he heard in the branches above him such a screaming and twittering that he looked up and saw there a crowd of birds who were tearing a piece of cloth about with their beaks and claws, and tugging and fighting as if each wanted to have it all to himself. “well,” said the huntsman, “this is wonderful, it has really come to pass just as the old wife foretold!”
and he took the gun from his shoulder, aimed and fired right into the midst of them, so that the feathers flew about. the birds instantly took to flight with loud outcries, but one dropped down dead, and the cloak fell at the same time. then the huntsman did as the old woman had directed him, cut open the bird, sought the heart, swallowed it down, and took the cloak home with him.
next morning, when he awoke, the promise occurred to him, and he wished to see if it also had been fulfilled. when he lifted up the pillow, the gold piece shone in his eyes, and next day he found another, and so it went on, every time he got up. he gathered together a heap of gold, but at last he thought, “of what use is all my gold to me if i stay at home? i will go forth and see the world.”
he then took leave of his parents, buckled on his huntsman’s pouch and gun, and went out into the world. it came to pass, that one day he travelled through a dense forest, and when he came to the end of it, in the plain before him stood a fine castle. an old woman was standing with a wonderfully beautiful maiden, looking out of one of the windows.
the old woman, however, was a witch and said to the maiden, “there comes one out of the forest, who has a wonderful treasure in his body, we must filch it from him, my dear daughter, it is more suitable for us than for him. he has a bird’s heart about him, by means of which a gold piece lies every morning under his pillow.” she told her what she was to do to get it, and what part she had to play, and finally threatened her, and said with angry eyes, “and if you do not attend to what i say, it will be the worse for you.” now when the huntsman came nearer he descried the maiden, and said to himself, “i have travelled about for such a long time, i will take a rest for once, and enter that beautiful castle. i have certainly money enough.” nevertheless, the real reason was that he had caught sight of the pretty girl.
he entered the house, and was well received and courteously entertained. before long he was so much in love with the young witch that he no longer thought of anything else, and only saw things as she saw them, and did what she desired. the old woman then said, “now we must have the bird’s heart, he will never miss it.” she prepared a drink, and when it was ready, poured it into a cup and gave it to the maiden, who was to present it to the huntsman. she did so, saying, “now, my dearest, drink to me.” so he took the cup, and when he had swallowed the draught, he brought up the heart of the bird. the girl had to take it away secretly and swallow it herself, for the old woman would have it so. thenceforward he found no more gold under his pillow, but it lay instead under that of the maiden, from whence the old woman fetched it away every morning; but he was so much in love and so befooled, that he thought of nothing else but of passing his time with the girl.
then the old witch said, “we have the bird’s heart, but we must also take the wishing-cloak away from him.” the girl answered, “we will leave him that, he has lost his wealth.” the old woman was angry and said, “such a mantle is a wonderful thing, and is seldom to be found in this world. i must and will have it!” she gave the girl several blows, and said that if she did not obey, it should fare ill with her. so she did the old woman’s bidding, placed herself at the window and looked on the distant country, as if she were very sorrowful. the huntsman asked, “why dost thou stand there so sorrowfully?” “ah, my beloved,” was her answer, “over yonder lies the garnet mountain, where the precious stones grow. i long for them so much that when i think of them, i feel quite sad, but who can get them? only the birds; they fly and can reach them, but a man never.” “hast thou nothing else to complain of?” said the huntsman. “i will soon remove that burden from thy heart.” with that he drew her under his mantle, wished himself on the garnet mountain, and in the twinkling of an eye they were sitting on it together. precious stones were glistening on every side so that it was a joy to see them, and together they gathered the finest and costliest of them. now, the old woman had, through her sorceries, contrived that the eyes of the huntsman should become heavy. he said to the maiden, “we will sit down and rest awhile, i am so tired that i can no longer stand on my feet.” then they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap, and fell asleep. when he was asleep, she unfastened the mantle from his shoulders, and wrapped herself in it, picked up the garnets and stones, and wished herself back at home with them.
but when the huntsman had had his sleep out and awoke, and perceived that his sweetheart had betrayed him, and left him alone on the wild mountain, he said, “oh, what treachery there is in the world!” and sat down there in care and sorrow, not knowing what to do. but the mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous giants who dwelt thereon and lived their lives there, and he had not sat long before he saw three of them coming towards him, so he lay down as if he were sunk in a deep sleep.
then the giants came up, and the first kicked him with his foot and said, “what sort of an earth-worm is lying curled up here?” the second said, “step upon him and kill him.” but the third said, “that would indeed be worth your while; just let him live, he cannot remain here; and when he climbs higher, toward the summit of of the mountain, the clouds will lay hold of him and bear him away.” so saying they passed by. but the huntsman had paid heed to their words, and as soon as they were gone, he rose and climbed up to the summit of the mountain, and when he had sat there a while, a cloud floated towards him, caught him up, carried him away, and travelled about for a long time in the heavens. then it sank lower, and let itself down on a great cabbage-garden, girt round by walls, so that he came softly to the ground on cabbages and vegetables.
then the huntsman looked about him and said, “if i had but something to eat! i am so hungry, and my hunger will increase in course of time; but i see here neither apples nor pears, nor any other sort of fruit, everywhere nothing but cabbages,” but at length he thought, “at a pinch i can eat some of the leaves, they do not taste particularly good, but they will refresh me.” with that he picked himself out a fine head of cabbage, and ate it, but scarcely had he swallowed a couple of mouthfuls than he felt very strange and quite different.
four legs grew on him, a large head and two thick ears, and he saw with horror that he was changed into an ass. still as his hunger increased every minute, and as the juicy leaves were suitable to his present nature, he went on eating with great zest. at last he arrived at a different kind of cabbage, but as soon as he had swallowed it, he again felt a change, and reassumed his former human shape.
then the huntsman lay down and slept off his fatigue. when he awoke next morning, he broke off one head of the bad cabbages and another of the good ones, and thought to himself, “this shall help me to get my own again and punish treachery.” then he took the cabbages with him, climbed over the wall, and went forth to seek for the castle of his sweetheart. after wandering about for a couple of days he was lucky enough to find it again. he dyed his face brown, so that his own mother would not have known him; and begged for shelter: “i am so tired,” said he, “that i can go no further.” the witch asked, “who are you, countryman, and what is your business?” “i am a king’s messenger, and was sent out to seek the most delicious salad which grows beneath the sun. i have even been so fortunate as to find it, and am carrying it about with me; but the heat of the sun is so intense that the delicate cabbage threatens to wither, and i do not know if i can carry it any further.”
when the old woman heard of the exquisite salad, she was greedy, and said, “dear countryman, let me just taste this wonderful salad.” “why not?” answered he, “i have brought two heads with me, and will give you one of them,” and he opened his pouch and handed her the bad cabbage.
the witch suspected nothing amiss, and her mouth watered so for this new dish that she herself went into the kitchen and dressed it. when it was prepared she could not wait until it was set on the table, but took a couple of leaves at once, and put them in her mouth, but hardly had she swallowed them than she was deprived of her human shape, and she ran out into the courtyard in the form of an ass. presently the maid-servant entered the kitchen, saw the salad standing there ready prepared, and was about to carry it up; but on the way, according to habit, she was seized by the desire to taste, and she ate a couple of leaves. instantly the magic power showed itself, and she likewise became an ass and ran out to the old woman, and the dish of salad fell to the ground. meantime the messenger sat beside the beautiful girl, and as no one came with the salad and she also was longing for it, she said, “i don’t know what has become of the salad.” the huntsman thought, “the salad must have already taken effect,” and said, “i will go to the kitchen and inquire about it.” as he went down he saw the two asses running about in the courtyard; the salad, however, was lying on the ground. “all right,” said he, “the two have taken their portion,”
and he picked up the other leaves, laid them on the dish, and carried them to the maiden. “i bring you the delicate food myself,” said he, “in order that you may not have to wait longer.” then she ate of it, and was, like the others, immediately deprived of her human form, and ran out into the courtyard in the shape of an ass.
after the huntsman had washed his face, so that the transformed ones could recognize him, he went down into the courtyard, and said, “now you shall receive the wages of your treachery,” and bound them together, all three with one rope, and drove them along until he came to a mill. he knocked at the window, the miller put out his head, and asked what he wanted. “i have three unmanageable beasts,” answered he, “which i don’t want to keep any longer. will you take them in, and give them food and stable room, and manage them as i tell you, and then i will pay you what you ask.” the miller said, “why not? but how am i to manage them?” the huntsman then said that he was to give three beatings and one meal daily to the old donkey, and that was the witch; one beating and three meals to the younger one, which was the servant-girl; and to the youngest, which was the maiden, no beatings and three meals, for he could not bring himself to have the maiden beaten. after that he went back into the castle, and found therein everything he needed.
after a couple of days, the miller came and said he must inform him that the old ass which had received three beatings and only one meal daily was dead; “the two others,” he continued, “are certainly not dead, and are fed three times daily, but they are so sad that they cannot last much longer.” the huntsman was moved to pity, put away his anger, and told the miller to drive them back again to him. and when they came, he gave them some of the good salad, so that they became human again. the beautiful girl fell on her knees before him, and said, “ah, my beloved, forgive me for the evil i have done you; my mother drove me to it; it was done against my will, for i love you dearly.
your wishing-cloak hangs in a cupboard, and as for the bird’s-heart i will take a vomiting potion.” but he thought otherwise, and said, “keep it; it is all the same, for i will take thee for my true wife.” so the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happily together until their death.
123 the old woman in the wood
a poor servant-girl was once travelling with the family with which she was in service, through a great forest, and when they were in the midst of it, robbers came out of the thicket, and murdered all they found.
all perished together except the girl, who had jumped out of the carriage in a fright, and hidden herself behind a tree. when the robbers had gone away with their booty, she came out and beheld the great disaster. then she began to weep bitterly, and said, “what can a poor girl like me do now? i do not know how to get out of the forest, no human being lives in it, so i must certainly starve.” she walked about and looked for a road, but could find none. when it was evening she seated herself under a tree, gave herself into god’s keeping, and resolved to sit waiting there and not go away, let what might happen.
when, however, she had sat there for a while, a white dove came flying to her with a little golden key in its mouth. it put the little key in her hand, and said, “dost thou see that great tree, therein is a little lock, it opens with the tiny key, and there thou wilt find food enough, and suffer no more hunger.” then she went to the tree and opened it, and found milk in a little dish, and white bread to break into it, so that she could eat her fill. when she was satisfied, she said, “it is now the time when the hens at home go to roost, i am so tired i could go to bed too.” then the dove flew to her again, and brought another golden key in its bill, and said, “open that tree there, and thou willt find a bed.” so she opened it, and found a beautiful white bed, and she prayed god to protect her during the night, and lay down and slept. in the morning the dove came for the third time, and again brought a little key, and said, “open that tree there, and thou wilt find clothes.” and when she opened it, she found garments beset with gold and with jewels, more splendid than those of any king’s daughter. so she lived there for some time, and the dove came every day and provided her with all she needed, and it was a quiet good life.
once, however, the dove came and said, “wilt thou do something for my sake?” “with all my heart,” said the girl. then said the little dove, “i will guide thee to a small house; enter it, and inside it, an old woman will be sitting by the fire and will say, ‘good-day.’ but on thy life give her no answer, let her do what she will, but pass by her on the right side; further on, there is a door, which open, and thou wilt enter into a room where a quantity of rings of all kinds are lying, amongst which are some magnificent ones with shining stones; leave them, however, where they are, and seek out a plain one, which must likewise be amongst them, and bring it here to me as quickly as thou canst.” the girl went to the little house, and came to the door. there sat an old woman who stared when she saw her, and said, “good-day my child.” the girl gave her no answer, and opened the door. “whither away,” cried the old woman, and seized her by the gown, and wanted to hold her fast, saying, “that is my house; no one can go in there if i choose not to allow it.” but the girl was silent, got away from her, and went straight into the room. now there lay on the table an enormous quantity of rings, which gleamed and glittered before her eyes. she turned them over and looked for the plain one, but could not find it.
while she was seeking, she saw the old woman and how she was stealing away, and wanting to get off with a bird-cage which she had in her hand. so she went after her and took the cage out of her hand, and when she raised it up and looked into it, a bird was inside which had the plain ring in its bill. then she took the ring, and ran quite joyously home with it, and thought the little white dove would come and get the ring, but it did not. then she leant against a tree and determined to wait for the dove, and, as she thus stood, it seemed just as if the tree was soft and pliant, and was letting its branches down. and suddenly the branches twined around her, and were two arms, and when she looked round, the tree was a handsome man, who embraced and kissed her heartily, and said, “thou hast delivered me from the power of the old woman, who is a wicked witch. she had changed me into a tree, and every day for two hours i was a white dove, and so long as she possessed the ring i could not regain my human form.” then his servants and his horses, who had likewise been changed into trees, were freed from the enchantment also, and stood beside him. and he led them forth to his kingdom, for he was a king’s son, and they married, and lived happily.
124 the three brothers
there was once a man who had three sons, and nothing else in the world but the house in which he lived. now each of the sons wished to have the house after his father’s death; but the father loved them all alike, and did not know what to do; he did not wish to sell the house, because it had belonged to his forefathers, else he might have divided the money amongst them. at last a plan came into his head, and he said to his sons, “go into the world, and try each of you to learn a trade, and, when you all come back, he who makes the best masterpiece shall have the house.”
the sons were well content with this, and the eldest determined to be a blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing-master. they fixed a time when they should all come home again, and then each went his way.
it chanced that they all found skilful masters, who taught them their trades well. the blacksmith had to shoe the king’s horses, and he thought to himself, “the house is mine, without doubt.” the barber only shaved great people, and he too already looked upon the house as his own. the fencing-master got many a blow, but he only bit his lip, and let nothing vex him; “for,” said he to himself, “if you are afraid of a blow, you’ll never win the house.”
when the appointed time had gone by, the three brothers came back home to their father; but they did not know how to find the best opportunity for showing their skill, so they sat down and consulted together. as they were sitting thus, all at once a hare came running across the field. “ah, ha, just in time!” said the barber. so he took his basin and soap, and lathered away until the hare came up; then he soaped and shaved off the hare’s whiskers whilst he was running at the top of his speed, and did not even cut his skin or injure a hair on his body.
“well done!” said the old man. “your brothers will have to exert themselves wonderfully, or the house will be yours.”
soon after, up came a nobleman in his coach, dashing along at full speed. “now you shall see what i can do, father,” said the blacksmith; so away he ran after the coach, took all four shoes off the feet of one of the horses whilst he was galloping, and put him on four new shoes without stopping him. “you are a fine fellow, and as clever as your brother,” said his father; “i do not know to which i ought to give the house.”
then the third son said, “father, let me have my turn, if you please;”
and, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword, and flourished it backwards and forwards above his head so fast that not a drop fell upon him. it rained still harder and harder, till at last it came down in torrents; but he only flourished his sword faster and faster, and remained as dry as if he were sitting in a house. when his father saw this he was amazed, and said, “this is the master-piece, the house is yours!”
his brothers were satisfied with this, as was agreed beforehand; and, as they loved one another very much, they all three stayed together in the house, followed their trades, and, as they had learnt them so well and were so clever, they earned a great deal of money. thus they lived together happily until they grew old; and at last, when one of them fell sick and died, the two others grieved so sorely about it that they also fell ill, and soon after died. and because they had been so clever, and had loved one another so much, they were all laid in the same grave.
125 the devil and his grandmother
there was a great war, and the king had many soldiers, but gave them small pay, so small that they could not live upon it, so three of them agreed among themselves to desert. one of them said to the others, “if we are caught we shall be hanged on the gallows; how shall we manage it?” another said, “look at that great cornfield, if we were to hide ourselves there, no one could find us; the troops are not allowed to enter it, and to-morrow they are to march away.” they crept into the corn, only the troops did not march away, but remained lying all round about it. they stayed in the corn for two days and two nights, and were so hungry that they all but died, but if they had come out, their death would have been certain. then said they, “what is the use of our deserting if we have to perish miserably here?” but now a fiery dragon came flying through the air, and it came down to them, and asked why they had concealed themselves there? they answered, “we are three soldiers who have deserted because the pay was so bad, and now we shall have to die of hunger if we stay here, or to dangle on the gallows if we go out.” “if you will serve me for seven years,” said the dragon, “i will convey you through the army so that no one shall seize you.” “we have no choice and are compelled to accept,” they replied. then the dragon caught hold of them with his claws, and carried them away through the air over the army, and put them down again on the earth far from it; but the dragon was no other than the devil. he gave them a small whip and said, “whip with it and crack it, and then as much gold will spring up round about as you can wish for; then you can live like great lords, keep horses, and drive your carriages, but when the seven years have come to an end, you are my property.” then he put before them a book which they were all three forced to sign. “i will, however, then set you a riddle,” said he, “and if you can guess that, you shall be free, and released from my power.” then the dragon flew away from them, and they went away with their whip, had gold in plenty, ordered themselves rich apparel, and travelled about the world. wherever they were they lived in pleasure and magnificence, rode on horseback, drove in carriages, ate and drank, but did nothing wicked. the time slipped quickly away, and when the seven years were coming to an end, two of them were terribly anxious and alarmed; but the third took the affair easily, and said, “brothers, fear nothing, my head is sharp enough, i shall guess the riddle.” they went out into the open country and sat down, and the two pulled sorrowful faces. then an aged woman came up to them who inquired why they were so sad? “alas!” said they, “how can that concern you? after all, you cannot help us.” “who knows?” said she. “confide your trouble to me.” so they told her that they had been the devil’s servants for nearly seven years, and that he had provided them with gold as plentifully as if it had been blackberries, but that they had sold themselves to him, and were forfeited to him, if at the end of the seven years they could not guess a riddle. the old woman said, “if you are to be saved, one of you must go into the forest, there he will come to a fallen rock which looks like a little house, he must enter that, and then he will obtain help.” the two melancholy ones thought to themselves, “that will still not save us,” and stayed where they were, but the third, the merry one, got up and walked on in the forest until he found the rock-house. in the little house, however, a very aged woman was sitting, who was the devil’s grandmother, and asked the soldier where he came from, and what he wanted there? he told her everything that had happened, and as he pleased her well, she had pity on him, and said she would help him. she lifted up a great stone which lay above a cellar, and said, “conceal thyself there, thou canst hear everything that is said here; only sit still, and do not stir. when the dragon comes, i will question him about the riddle, he tells everything to me, so listen carefully to his answer.” at twelve o’clock at night, the dragon came flying thither, and asked for his dinner. the grandmother laid the table, and served up food and drink, so that he was pleased, and they ate and drank together. in the course of conversation, she asked him what kind of a day he had had, and how many souls he had got? “nothing went very well to-day,” he answered, “but i have laid hold of three soldiers, i have them safe.” “indeed! three soldiers, that’s something like, but they may escape you yet.” the devil said mockingly, “they are mine! i will set them a riddle, which they will never in this world be able to guess!” “what riddle is that?”
she inquired. “i will tell you. in the great north sea lies a dead dog-fish, that shall be your roast meat, and the rib of a whale shall be your silver spoon, and a hollow old horse’s hoof shall be your wine-glass.” when the devil had gone to bed, the old grandmother raised up the stone, and let out the soldier. “hast thou paid particular attention to everything?” “yes,” said he, “i know enough, and will contrive to save myself.” then he had to go back another way, through the window, secretly and with all speed to his companions. he told them how the devil had been overreached by the old grandmother, and how he had learned the answer to the riddle from him. then they were all joyous, and of good cheer, and took the whip and whipped so much gold for themselves that it ran all over the ground. when the seven years had fully gone by, the devil came with the book, showed the signatures, and said, “i will take you with me to hell. there you shall have a meal! if you can guess what kind of roast meat you will have to eat, you shall be free and released from your bargain, and may keep the whip as well.” then the first soldier began and said, “in the great north sea lies a dead dog-fish, that no doubt is the roast meat.” the devil was angry, and began to mutter, “hm! hm! hm!” and asked the second, “but what will your spoon be?” “the rib of a whale, that is to be our silver spoon.” the devil made a wry face, again growled, “hm! hm! hm!”
and said to the third, “and do you also know what your wine-glass is to be?” “an old horse’s hoof is to be our wineglass.” then the devil flew away with a loud cry, and had no more power over them, but the three kept the whip, whipped as much money for themselves with it as they wanted, and lived happily to their end.
126 ferdinand the faithful
once on a time lived a man and a woman who so long as they were rich had no children, but when they were poor they had a little boy. they could, however, find no godfather for him, so the man said he would just go to another place to see if he could get one there. as he went, a poor man met him, who asked him where he was going. he said he was going to see if he could get a godfather, that he was poor, so no one would stand as godfather for him. “oh,” said the poor man, “you are poor, and i am poor; i will be godfather for you, but i am so ill off i can give the child nothing. go home and tell the nurse that she is to come to the church with the child.”
when they all got to the church together, the beggar was already there, and he gave the child the name of ferdinand the faithful.
when he was going out of the church, the beggar said, “now go home, i can give you nothing, and you likewise ought to give me nothing.” but he gave a key to the nurse, and told her when she got home she was to give it to the father, who was to take care of it until the child was fourteen years old, and then he was to go on the heath where there was a castle which the key would fit, and that all which was therein should belong to him. now when the child was seven years old and had grown very big, he once went to play with some other boys, and each of them boasted that he had got more from his godfather than the other; but the child could say nothing, and was vexed, and went home and said to his father, “did i get nothing at all, then, from my godfather?” “oh, yes,”
said the father, “thou hadst a key if there is a castle standing on the heath, just go to it and open it.” then the boy went thither, but no castle was to be seen, or heard of.
after seven years more, when he was fourteen years old, he again went thither, and there stood the castle. when he had opened it, there was nothing within but a horse, a white one. then the boy was so full of joy because he had a horse, that he mounted on it and galloped back to his father. “now i have a white horse, and i will travel,” said he. so he set out, and as he was on his way, a pen was lying on the road. at first he thought he would pick it up, but then again he thought to himself, “thou shouldst leave it lying there; thou wilt easily find a pen where thou art going, if thou hast need of one.” as he was thus riding away, a voice called after him, “ferdinand the faithful, take it with thee.” he looked around, but saw no one, then he went back again and picked it up. when he had ridden a little way farther, he passed by a lake, and a fish was lying on the bank, gasping and panting for breath, so he said, “wait, my dear fish, i will help thee get into the water,” and he took hold of it by the tail, and threw it into the lake.
then the fish put its head out of the water and said, “as thou hast helped me out of the mud i will give thee a flute; when thou art in any need, play on it, and then i will help thee, and if ever thou lettest anything fall in the water, just play and i will reach it out to thee.”
then he rode away, and there came to him a man who asked him where he was going. “oh, to the next place.” then what his name was? “ferdinand the faithful.” “so! then we have got almost the same name, i am called ferdinand the unfaithful.” and they both set out to the inn in the nearest place.
now it was unfortunate that ferdinand the unfaithful knew everything that the other had ever thought and everything he was about to do; he knew it by means of all kinds of wicked arts. there was, however, in the inn an honest girl, who had a bright face and behaved very prettily. she fell in love with ferdinand the faithful because he was a handsome man, and she asked him whither he was going. “oh, i am just travelling round about,” said he. then she said he ought to stay there, for the king of that country wanted an attendant or an outrider, and he ought to enter his service. he answered he could not very well go to any one like that and offer himself. then said the maiden, “oh, but i will soon do that for you.” and so she went straight to the king, and told him that she knew of an excellent servant for him. he was well pleased with that, and had ferdinand the faithful brought to him, and wanted to make him his servant. he, however, liked better to be an outrider, for where his horse was, there he also wanted to be, so the king made him an outrider. when ferdinand the unfaithful learnt that, he said to the girl, “what! dost thou help him and not me?” “oh,” said the girl, “i will help thee too.” she thought, “i must keep friends with that man, for he is not to be trusted.” she went to the king, and offered him as a servant, and the king was willing.
now when the king met his lords in the morning, he always lamented and said, “oh, if i had but my love with me.” ferdinand the unfaithful was, however, always hostile to ferdinand the faithful. so once, when the king was complaining thus, he said, “you have the outrider, send him away to get her, and if he does not do it, his head must be struck off.” then the king sent for ferdinand the faithful, and told him that there was, in this place or in that place, a girl he loved, and that he was to bring her to him, and if he did not do it he should die.
ferdinand the faithful went into the stable to his white horse, and complained and lamented, “oh, what an unhappy man i am!” then someone behind him cried, “ferdinand the faithful, why weepest thou?” he looked round but saw no one, and went on lamenting; “oh, my dear little white horse, now must i leave thee; now must i die.” then some one cried once more, “ferdinand the faithful, why weepest thou?” then for the first time he was aware that it was his little white horse who was putting that question. “dost thou speak, my little white horse; canst thou do that?” and again, he said, “i am to go to this place and to that, and am to bring the bride; canst thou tell me how i am to set about it?”
then answered the little white horse, “go thou to the king, and say if he will give thou what thou must have, thou wilt get her for him. if he will give thee a ship full of meat, and a ship full of bread, it will succeed. great giants dwell on the lake, and if thou takest no meat with thee for them, they will tear thee to pieces, and there are the large birds which would pick the eyes out of thy head if thou hadst no bread for them.” then the king made all the butchers in the land kill, and all the bakers bake, that the ships might be filled. when they were full, the little white horse said to ferdinand the faithful, “now mount me, and go with me into the ship, and then when the giants come, say,
“peace, peace, my dear little giants, i have had thought of ye, something i have brought for ye;”
and when the birds come, thou shalt again say,
“peace, peace, my dear little birds, i have had thought of ye, something i have brought for ye;”
then they will do nothing to thee, and when thou comest to the castle, the giants will help thee. then go up to the castle, and take a couple of giants with thee. there the princess lies sleeping; thou must, however, not awaken her, but the giants must lift her up, and carry her in her bed to the ship.” and now everything took place as the little white horse had said, and ferdinand the faithful gave the giants and the birds what he had brought with him for them, and that made the giants willing, and they carried the princess in her bed to the king.
and when she came to the king, she said she could not live, she must have her writings, they had been left in her castle. then by the instigation of ferdinand the unfaithful, ferdinand the faithful was called, and the king told him he must fetch the writings from the castle, or he should die. then he went once more into the stable, and bemoaned himself and said, “oh, my dear little white horse, now i am to go away again, how am i to do it?” then the little white horse said he was just to load the ships full again. so it happened again as it had happened before, and the giants and the birds were satisfied, and made gentle by the meat. when they came to the castle, the white horse told ferdinand the faithful that he must go in, and that on the table in the princess’s bed-room lay the writings. and ferdinand the faithful went in, and fetched them. when they were on the lake, he let his pen fall into the water; then said the white horse, “now i cannot help thee at all.” but he remembered his flute, and began to play on it, and the fish came with the pen in its mouth, and gave it to him. so he took the writings to the castle, where the wedding was celebrated.
the queen, however, did not love the king because he had no nose, but she would have much liked to love ferdinand the faithful. once, therefore, when all the lords of the court were together, the queen said she could do feats of magic, that she could cut off any one’s head and put it on again, and that one of them ought just to try it. but none of them would be the first, so ferdinand the faithful, again at the instigation of ferdinand the unfaithful, undertook it and she hewed off his head, and put it on again for him, and it healed together directly, so that it looked as if he had a red thread round his throat.
then the king said to her, “my child, and where hast thou learnt that?”
“yes,” she said, “i understand the art; shall i just try it on thee also?” “oh, yes,” said he. but she cut off his head, and did not put it on again; but pretended that she could not get it on, and that it would not keep fixed. then the king was buried, but she married ferdinand the faithful.
he, however, always rode on his white horse, and once when he was seated on it, it told him that he was to go on to the heath which he knew, and gallop three times round it. and when he had done that, the white horse stood up on its hind legs, and was changed into a king’s son.
127 the iron stove
in the days when wishing was still of some use, a king’s son was bewitched by an old witch, and shut up in an iron stove in a forest.
there he passed many years, and no one could deliver him. then a king’s daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself, and could not find her father’s kingdom again. after she had wandered about for nine days, she at length came to the iron stove. then a voice came forth from it, and asked her, “whence comest thou, and whither goest, thou?” she answered, “i have lost my father’s kingdom, and cannot get home again.”
then a voice inside the iron stove said, “i will help thee to get home again, and that indeed most swiftly, if thou wilt promise to do what i desire of thee. i am the son of a far greater king than thy father, and i will marry thee.”
then was she afraid, and thought, “good heavens! what can i do with an iron stove?” but as she much wished to get home to her father, she promised to do as he desired. but he said, “thou shalt return here, and bring a knife with thee, and scrape a hole in the iron.” then he gave her a companion who walked near her, but did not speak, but in two hours he took her home; there was great joy in the castle when the king’s daughter came home, and the old king fell on her neck and kissed her. she, however, was sorely troubled, and said, “dear father, what i have suffered! i should never have got home again from the great wild forest, if i had not come to an iron stove, but i have been forced to give my word that i will go back to it, set it free, and marry it.”
then the old king was so terrified that he all but fainted, for he had but this one daughter. they therefore resolved they would send, in her place, the miller’s daughter, who was very beautiful. they took her there, gave her a knife, and said she was to scrape at the iron stove.
so she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, but could not bring off the least morsel of it. when day dawned, a voice in the stove said, “it seems to me it is day outside.” then she answered, “it seems so to me too; i fancy i hear the noise of my father’s mill.”
“so thou art a miller’s daughter! then go thy way at once, and let the king’s daughter come here.” then she went away at once, and told the old king that the man outside there, would have none of her he wanted the king’s daughter. they, however, still had a swine-herd’s daughter, who was even prettier than the miller’s daughter, and they determined to give her a piece of gold to go to the iron stove instead of the king’s daughter. so she was taken thither, and she also had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours. she, however, made nothing of it. when day broke, a voice inside the stove cried, “it seems to me it is day outside!” then answered she, “so it seems to me also; i fancy i hear my father’s horn blowing.”
“then thou art a swine-herd’s daughter! go away at once, and tell the king’s daughter to come, and tell her all must be done as promised, and if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall be ruined and destroyed, and not one stone be left standing on another.” when the king’s daughter heard that she began to weep, but now there was nothing for it but to keep her promise. so she took leave of her father, put a knife in her pocket, and went forth to the iron stove in the forest.
when she got there, she began to scrape, and the iron gave way, and when two hours were over, she had already scraped a small hole. then she peeped in, and saw a youth so handsome, and so brilliant with gold and with precious jewels, that her very soul was delighted. now, therefore, she went on scraping, and made the hole so large that he was able to get out. then said he, “thou art mine, and i am thine; thou art my bride, and hast released me.” he wanted to take her away with him to his kingdom, but she entreated him to let her go once again to her father, and the king’s son allowed her to do so, but she was not to say more to her father than three words, and then she was to come back again. so she went home, but she spoke more than three words, and instantly the iron stove disappeared, and was taken far away over glass mountains and piercing swords; but the king’s son was set free, and no longer shut up in it. after this she bade good-bye to her father, took some money with her, but not much, and went back to the great forest, and looked for the iron stove, but it was nowhere to be found. for nine days she sought it, and then her hunger grew so great that she did not know what to do, for she could no longer live. when it was evening, she seated herself in a small tree, and made up her mind to spend the night there, as she was afraid of wild beasts. when midnight drew near she saw in the distance a small light, and thought, “ah, there i should be saved!” she got down from the tree, and went towards the light, but on the way she prayed. then she came to a little old house, and much grass had grown all about it, and a small heap of wood lay in front of it.
she thought, “ah, whither have i come,” and peeped in through the window, but she saw nothing inside but toads, big and little, except a table well covered with wine and roast meat, and the plates and glasses were of silver. then she took courage, and knocked at the door. the fat toad cried,
“little green waiting-maid, waiting-maid with the limping leg, little dog of the limping leg, hop hither and thither, and quickly see who is without:”
and a small toad came walking by and opened the door to her. when she entered, they all bade her welcome, and she was forced to sit down.
they asked, “where hast thou come from, and whither art thou going?”
then she related all that had befallen her, and how because she had transgressed the order which had been given her not to say more than three words, the stove, and the king’s son also, had disappeared, and now she was about to seek him over hill and dale until she found him.
then the old fat one said,
“little green waiting-maid, waiting-maid with the limping leg, little dog of the limping leg, hop hither and thither, and bring me the great box.”
then the little one went and brought the box. after this they gave her meat and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which felt like silk and velvet, and she laid herself therein, in god’s name, and slept.
when morning came she arose, and the old toad gave her three needles out of the great box which she was to take with her; they would be needed by her, for she had to cross a high glass mountain, and go over three piercing swords and a great lake. if she did all this she would get her lover back again. then she gave her three things, which she was to take the greatest care of, namely, three large needles, a plough-wheel, and three nuts. with these she travelled onwards, and when she came to the glass mountain which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first behind her feet and then before them, and so got over it, and when she was over it, she hid them in a place which she marked carefully. after this she came to the three piercing swords, and then she seated herself on her plough-wheel, and rolled over them.
at last she arrived in front of a great lake, and when she had crossed it, she came to a large and beautiful castle. she went and asked for a place; she was a poor girl, she said, and would like to be hired. she knew, however, that the king’s son whom she had released from the iron stove in the great forest was in the castle. then she was taken as a scullery-maid at low wages. but, already the king’s son had another maiden by his side whom he wanted to marry, for he thought that she had long been dead.
in the evening, when she had washed up and was done, she felt in her pocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had given her. she cracked one with her teeth, and was going to eat the kernel when lo and behold there was a stately royal garment in it! but when the bride heard of this she came and asked for the dress, and wanted to buy it, and said, “it is not a dress for a servant-girl.” but she said no, she would not sell it, but if the bride would grant her one thing she should have it, and that was, leave to sleep one night in her bridegroom’s chamber. the bride gave her permission because the dress was so pretty, and she had never had one like it. when it was evening she said to her bridegroom, “that silly girl will sleep in thy room.”
“if thou art willing so am i,” said he. she, however, gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a sleeping-draught. so the bridegroom and the scullery-maid went to sleep in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not waken him.
she wept the whole night and cried, “i set thee free when thou wert in an iron stove in the wild forest, i sought thee, and walked over a glass mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great lake before i found thee, and yet thou wilt not hear me!”
the servants sat by the chamber-door, and heard how she thus wept the whole night through, and in the morning they told it to their lord. and the next evening when she had washed up, she opened the second nut, and a far more beautiful dress was within it, and when the bride beheld it, she wished to buy that also. but the girl would not take money, and begged that she might once again sleep in the bridegroom’s chamber. the bride, however, gave him a sleeping-drink, and he slept so soundly that he could hear nothing. but the scullery-maid wept the whole night long, and cried, “i set thee free when thou wert in an iron stove in the wild forest, i sought thee, and walked over a glass mountain, and over three sharp swords and a great lake before i found thee, and yet thou wilt not hear me!” the servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night through, and in the morning informed their lord of it. and on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the third nut, and within it was a still more beautiful dress which was stiff with pure gold. when the bride saw that she wanted to have it, but the maiden only gave it up on condition that she might for the third time sleep in the bridegroom’s apartment. the king’s son was, however, on his guard, and threw the sleeping-draught away. now, therefore, when she began to weep and to cry, “dearest love, i set thee free when thou wert in the iron stove in the terrible wild forest,” the king’s son leapt up and said, “thou art the true one, thou art mine, and i am thine.” thereupon, while it was still night, he got into a carriage with her, and they took away the false bride’s clothes so that she could not get up. when they came to the great lake, they sailed across it, and when they reached the three sharp-cutting swords they seated themselves on the plough-wheel, and when they got to the glass mountain they thrust the three needles in it, and so at length they got to the little old house; but when they went inside that, it was a great castle, and the toads were all disenchanted, and were king’s children, and full of happiness. then the wedding was celebrated, and the king’s son and the princess remained in the castle, which was much larger than the castles of their fathers. as, however, the old king grieved at being left alone, they fetched him away, and brought him to live with them, and they had two kingdoms, and lived in happy wedlock.
a mouse did run, this story is done.
128 the lazy spinner
in a certain village there once lived a man and his wife, and the wife was so idle that she would never work at anything; whatever her husband gave her to spin, she did not get done, and what she did spin she did not wind, but let it all remain entangled in a heap. if the man scolded her, she was always ready with her tongue, and said, “well, how should i wind it, when i have no reel? just you go into the forest and get me one.” “if that is all,” said the man, “then i will go into the forest, and get some wood for making reels.” then the woman was afraid that if he had the wood he would make her a reel of it, and she would have to wind her yarn off, and then begin to spin again. she bethought herself a little, and then a lucky idea occurred to her, and she secretly followed the man into the forest, and when he had climbed into a tree to choose and cut the wood, she crept into the thicket below where he could not see her, and cried,
“he who cuts wood for reels shall die, and he who winds, shall perish.”
the man listened, laid down his axe for a moment, and began to consider what that could mean. “hollo,” he said at last, “what can that have been; my ears must have been singing, i won’t alarm myself for nothing.” so he again seized the axe, and began to hew, then again there came a cry from below:
“he who cuts wood for reels shall die, and he who winds, shall perish.”
he stopped, and felt afraid and alarmed, and pondered over the circumstance. but when a few moments had passed, he took heart again, and a third time he stretched out his hand for the axe, and began to cut. but some one called out a third time, and said loudly,
“he who cuts wood for reels shall die, and he who winds, shall perish.”
that was enough for him, and all inclination had departed from him, so he hastily descended the tree, and set out on his way home. the woman ran as fast as she could by by-ways so as to get home first. so when he entered the parlour, she put on an innocent look as if nothing had happened, and said, “well, have you brought a nice piece of wood for reels?” “no,” said he, “i see very well that winding won’t do,” and told her what had happened to him in the forest, and from that time forth left her in peace about it. neverthless after some time, the man again began to complain of the disorder in the house. “wife,” said he, “it is really a shame that the spun yarn should lie there all entangled!” “i’ll tell you what,” said she, “as we still don’t come by any reel, go you up into the loft, and i will stand down below, and will throw the yarn up to you, and you will throw it down to me, and so we shall get a skein after all.” “yes, that will do,” said the man. so they did that, and when it was done, he said, “the yarn is in skeins, now it must be boiled.” the woman was again distressed; she certainly said, “yes, we will boil it next morning early.” but she was secretly contriving another trick.
early in the morning she got up, lighted a fire, and put the kettle on, only instead of the yarn, she put in a lump of tow, and let it boil.
after that she went to the man who was still lying in bed, and said to him, “i must just go out, you must get up and look after the yarn which is in the kettle on the fire, but you must be at hand at once; mind that, for if the cock should happen to crow, and you are not attending to the yarn, it will become tow.” the man was willing and took good care not to loiter. he got up as quickly as he could, and went into the kitchen. but when he reached the kettle and peeped in, he saw, to his horror, nothing but a lump of tow. then the poor man was as still as a mouse, thinking he had neglected it, and was to blame, and in future said no more about yarn and spinning. but you yourself must own she was an odious woman!
129 the four skilful brothers
there was once a poor man who had four sons, and when they were grown up, he said to them, “my dear children, you must now go out into the world, for i have nothing to give you, so set out, and go to some distance and learn a trade, and see how you can make your way.” so the four brothers took their sticks, bade their father farewell, and went through the town-gate together. when they had travelled about for some time, they came to a cross-way which branched off in four different directions. then said the eldest, “here we must separate, but on this day four years, we will meet each other again at this spot, and in the meantime we will seek our fortunes.”
then each of them went his way, and the eldest met a man who asked him where he was going, and what he was intending to do? “i want to learn a trade,” he replied. then the other said, “come with me, and be a thief.” “no,” he answered, “that is no longer regarded as a reputable trade, and the end of it is that one has to swing on the gallows.”
“oh,” said the man, “you need not be afraid of the gallows; i will only teach you to get such things as no other man could ever lay hold of, and no one will ever detect you.” so he allowed himself to be talked into it, and while with the man became an accomplished thief, and so dexterous that nothing was safe from him, if he once desired to have it. the second brother met a man who put the same question to him what he wanted to learn in the world. “i don’t know yet,” he replied. “then come with me, and be an astronomer; there is nothing better than that, for nothing is hid from you.” he liked the idea, and became such a skillful astronomer that when he had learnt everything, and was about to travel onwards, his master gave him a telescope and said to him, “with that you canst thou see whatsoever takes place either on earth or in heaven, and nothing can remain concealed from thee.” a huntsman took the third brother into training, and gave him such excellent instruction in everything which related to huntsmanship, that he became an experienced hunter. when he went away, his master gave him a gun and said, “it will never fail you; whatsoever you aim at, you are certain to hit.” the youngest brother also met a man who spoke to him, and inquired what his intentions were. “would you not like to be a tailor?”
said he. “not that i know of,” said the youth; “sitting doubled up from morning till night, driving the needle and the goose backwards and forwards, is not to my taste.” “oh, but you are speaking in ignorance,”
answered the man; “with me you would learn a very different kind of tailoring, which is respectable and proper, and for the most part very honorable.” so he let himself be persuaded, and went with the man, and learnt his art from the very beginning. when they parted, the man gave the youth a needle, and said, “with this you can sew together whatever is given you, whether it is as soft as an egg or as hard as steel; and it will all become one piece of stuff, so that no seam will be visible.”
when the appointed four years were over, the four brothers arrived at the same time at the cross-roads, embraced and kissed each other, and returned home to their father. “so now,” said he, quite delighted, “the wind has blown you back again to me.” they told him of all that had happened to them, and that each had learnt his own trade. now they were sitting just in front of the house under a large tree, and the father said, “i will put you all to the test, and see what you can do.” then he looked up and said to his second son, “between two branches up at the top of this tree, there is a chaffinch’s nest, tell me how many eggs there are in it?” the astronomer took his glass, looked up, and said, “there are five.” then the father said to the eldest, “fetch the eggs down without disturbing the bird which is sitting hatching them.”
the skillful thief climbed up, and took the five eggs from beneath the bird, which never observed what he was doing, and remained quietly sitting where she was, and brought them down to his father. the father took them, and put one of them on each corner of the table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, “with one shot thou shalt shoot me the five eggs in two, through the middle.” the huntsman aimed, and shot the eggs, all five as the father had desired, and that at one shot. he certainly must have had some of the powder for shooting round corners. “now it’s your turn,” said the father to the fourth son; “you shall sew the eggs together again, and the young birds that are inside them as well, and you must do it so that they are not hurt by the shot.” the tailor brought his needle, and sewed them as his father wished. when he had done this the thief had to climb up the tree again, and carry them to the nest, and put them back again under the bird without her being aware of it. the bird sat her full time, and after a few days the young ones crept out, and they had a red line round their necks where they had been sewn together by the tailor.
“well,” said the old man to his sons, “i begin to think you are worth more than breen clover; you have used your time well, and learnt something good. i can’t say which of you deserves the most praise. that will be proved if you have but an early opportunity of using your talents.” not long after this, there was a great uproar in the country, for the king’s daughter was carried off by a dragon. the king was full of trouble about it, both by day and night, and caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever brought her back should have her to wife. the four brothers said to each other, “this would be a fine opportunity for us to show what we can do!” and resolved to go forth together and liberate the king’s daughter. “i will soon know where she is,” said the astronomer, and looked through his telescope and said, “i see her already, she is far away from here on a rock in the sea, and the dragon is beside her watching her.” then he went to the king, and asked for a ship for himself and his brothers, and sailed with them over the sea until they came to the rock. there the king’s daughter was sitting, and the dragon was lying asleep on her lap. the huntsman said, “i dare not fire, i should kill the beautiful maiden at the same time.” “then i will try my art,” said the thief, and he crept thither and stole her away from under the dragon, so quietly and dexterously, that the monster never remarked it, but went on snoring. full of joy, they hurried off with her on board ship, and steered out into the open sea; but the dragon, who when he awoke had found no princess there, followed them, and came snorting angrily through the air. just as he was circling above the ship, and about to descend on it, the huntsman shouldered his gun, and shot him to the heart. the monster fell down dead, but was so large and powerful that his fall shattered the whole ship. fortunately, however, they laid hold of a couple of planks, and swam about the wide sea. then again they were in great peril, but the tailor, who was not idle, took his wondrous needle, and with a few stitches sewed the planks together, and they seated themselves upon them, and collected together all the fragments of the vessel. then he sewed these so skilfully together, that in a very short time the ship was once more seaworthy, and they could go home again in safety.
when the king once more saw his daughter, there were great rejoicings.
he said to the four brothers, “one of you shall have her to wife, but which of you it is to be you must settle among yourselves.” then a warm contest arose among them, for each of them preferred his own claim. the astronomer said, “if i had not seen the princess, all your arts would have been useless, so she is mine.” the thief said, “what would have been the use of your seeing, if i had not got her away from the dragon?
so she is mine.” the huntsman said, “you and the princess, and all of you, would have been torn to pieces by the dragon if my ball had not hit him, so she is mine.” the tailor said, “and if i, by my art, had not sewn the ship together again, you would all of you have been miserably drowned, so she is mine.” then the king uttered this saying, “each of you has an equal right, and as all of you cannot have the maiden, none of you shall have her, but i will give to each of you, as a reward, half a kingdom.” the brothers were pleased with this decision, and said, “it is better thus than that we should be at variance with each other.” then each of them received half a kingdom, and they lived with their father in the greatest happiness as long as it pleased god.
130 one-eye, two-eyes, and three-eyes
there was once a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whom was called one-eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of her forehead, and the second, two-eyes, because she had two eyes like other folks, and the youngest, three-eyes, because she had three eyes; and her third eye was also in the centre of her forehead. however, as two-eyes saw just as other human beings did, her sisters and her mother could not endure her. they said to her, “thou, with thy two eyes, art no better than the common people; thou dost not belong to us!” they pushed her about, and threw old clothes to her, and gave her nothing to eat but what they left, and did everything that they could to make her unhappy. it came to pass that two-eyes had to go out into the fields and tend the goat, but she was still quite hungry, because her sisters had given her so little to eat. so she sat down on a ridge and began to weep, and so bitterly that two streams ran down from her eyes. and once when she looked up in her grief, a woman was standing beside her, who said, “why art thou weeping, little two-eyes?” two-eyes answered, “have i not reason to weep, when i have two eyes like other people, and my sisters and mother hate me for it, and push me from one corner to another, throw old clothes at me, and give me nothing to eat but the scraps they leave? to-day they have given me so little that i am still quite hungry.” then the wise woman said, “wipe away thy tears, two-eyes, and i will tell thee something to stop thee ever suffering from hunger again; just say to thy goat,
“bleat, my little goat, bleat, cover the table with something to eat,”
and then a clean well-spread little table will stand before thee, with the most delicious food upon it of which thou mayst eat as much as thou art inclined for, and when thou hast had enough, and hast no more need of the little table, just say,
“bleat, bleat, my little goat, i pray, and take the table quite away,”
and then it will vanish again from thy sight.” hereupon the wise woman departed. but two-eyes thought, “i must instantly make a trial, and see if what she said is true, for i am far too hungry,” and she said,
“bleat, my little goat, bleat, cover the table with something to eat,”
and scarcely had she spoken the words than a little table, covered with a white cloth, was standing there, and on it was a plate with a knife and fork, and a silver spoon; and the most delicious food was there also, warm and smoking as if it had just come out of the kitchen. then two-eyes said the shortest prayer she knew, “lord god, be with us always, amen,” and helped herself to some food, and enjoyed it. and when she was satisfied, she said, as the wise woman had taught her,
“bleat, bleat, my little goat, i pray, and take the table quite away,”
and immediately the little table and everything on it was gone again.
“that is a delightful way of keeping house!” thought two-eyes, and was quite glad and happy.
in the evening, when she went home with her goat, she found a small earthenware dish with some food, which her sisters had set ready for her, but she did not touch it. next day she again went out with her goat, and left the few bits of broken bread which had been handed to her, lying untouched. the first and second time that she did this, her sisters did not remark it at all, but as it happened every time, they did observe it, and said, “there is something wrong about two-eyes, she always leaves her food untasted, and she used to eat up everything that was given her; she must have discovered other ways of getting food.” in order that they might learn the truth, they resolved to send one-eye with two-eyes when she went to drive her goat to the pasture, to observe what two-eyes did when she was there, and whether any one brought her anything to eat and drink. so when two-eyes set out the next time, one-eye went to her and said, “i will go with you to the pasture, and see that the goat is well taken care of, and driven where there is food.” but two-eyes knew what was in one-eye’s mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, “come, one-eye, we will sit down, and i will sing something to you.” one-eye sat down and was tired with the unaccustomed walk and the heat of the sun, and two-eyes sang constantly,
“one eye, wakest thou?
one eye, sleepest thou?”
until one-eye shut her one eye, and fell asleep, and as soon as two-eyes saw that one-eye was fast asleep, and could discover nothing, she said,
“bleat, my little goat, bleat, cover the table with something to eat,”
and seated herself at her table, and ate and drank until she was satisfied, and then she again cried,
“bleat, bleat, my little goat, i pray, and take the table quite away,”
and in an instant all was gone. two-eyes now awakened one-eye, and said, “one-eye, you want to take care of the goat, and go to sleep while you are doing it, and in the meantime the goat might run all over the world. come, let us go home again.” so they went home, and again two-eyes let her little dish stand untouched, and one-eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat it, and to excuse herself said, “i fell asleep when i was out.”
next day the mother said to three-eyes, “this time thou shalt go and observe if two-eyes eats anything when she is out, and if any one fetches her food and drink, for she must eat and drink in secret.” so three-eyes went to two-eyes, and said, “i will go with you and see if the goat is taken proper care of, and driven where there is food.” but two-eyes knew what was in three-eyes’ mind, and drove the goat into high grass and said, “we will sit down, and i will sing something to you, three-eyes.” three-eyes sat down and was tired with the walk and with the heat of the sun, and two-eyes began the same song as before, and sang,
“three eyes, are you waking?”
but then, instead of singing,
“three eyes, are you sleeping?”
as she ought to have done, she thoughtlessly sang,
“two eyes, are you sleeping?”
and sang all the time,
“three eyes, are you waking?
two eyes, are you sleeping?”
then two of the eyes which three-eyes had, shut and fell asleep, but the third, as it had not been named in the song, did not sleep. it is true that three-eyes shut it, but only in her cunning, to pretend it was asleep too, but it blinked, and could see everything very well. and when two-eyes thought that three-eyes was fast asleep, she used her little charm,
“bleat, my little goat, bleat, cover the table with something to eat,”
and ate and drank as much as her heart desired, and then ordered the table to go away again,
“bleat, bleat, my little goat, i pray, and take the table quite away,”
and three-eyes had seen everything. then two-eyes came to her, waked her and said, “have you been asleep, three-eyes? you are a good care-taker! come, we will go home.” and when they got home, two-eyes again did not eat, and three-eyes said to the mother, “now, i know why that high-minded thing there does not eat. when she is out, she says to the goat,
“bleat, my little goat, bleat, cover the table with something to eat,”
and then a little table appears before her covered with the best of food, much better than any we have here, and when she has eaten all she wants, she says,
“bleat, bleat, my little goat, i pray, and take the table quite away,”
and all disappears. i watched everything closely. she put two of my eyes to sleep by using a certain form of words, but luckily the one in my forehead kept awake.” then the envious mother cried, “dost thou want to fare better than we do? the desire shall pass away,” and she fetched a butcher’s knife, and thrust it into the heart of the goat, which fell down dead.
when two-eyes saw that, she went out full of trouble, seated herself on the ridge of grass at the edge of the field, and wept bitter tears.
suddenly the wise woman once more stood by her side, and said, “two-eyes, why art thou weeping?” “have i not reason to weep?” she answered. “the goat which covered the table for me every day when i spoke your charm, has been killed by my mother, and now i shall again have to bear hunger and want.” the wise woman said, “two-eyes, i will give thee a piece of good advice; ask thy sisters to give thee the entrails of the slaughtered goat, and bury them in the ground in front of the house, and thy fortune will be made.” then she vanished, and two-eyes went home and said to her sisters, “dear sisters, do give me some part of my goat; i don’t wish for what is good, but give me the entrails.” then they laughed and said, “if that’s all you want, you can have it.” so two-eyes took the entrails and buried them quietly in the evening, in front of the house-door, as the wise woman had counselled her to do.
next morning, when they all awoke, and went to the house-door, there stood a strangely magnificent tree with leaves of silver, and fruit of gold hanging among them, so that in all the wide world there was nothing more beautiful or precious. they did not know how the tree could have come there during the night, but two-eyes saw that it had grown up out of the entrails of the goat, for it was standing on the exact spot where she had buried them. then the mother said to one-eye, “climb up, my child, and gather some of the fruit of the tree for us.”
one-eye climbed up, but when she was about to get hold of one of the golden apples, the branch escaped from her hands, and that happened each time, so that she could not pluck a single apple, let her do what she might. then said the mother, “three-eyes, do you climb up; you with your three eyes can look about you better than one-eye.” one-eye slipped down, and three-eyes climbed up. three-eyes was not more skilful, and might search as she liked, but the golden apples always escaped her. at length the mother grew impatient, and climbed up herself, but could get hold of the fruit no better than one-eye and three-eyes, for she always clutched empty air. then said two-eyes, “i will just go up, perhaps i may succeed better.” the sisters cried, “you indeed, with your two eyes, what can you do?” but two-eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did get out of her way, but came into her hand of their own accord, so that she could pluck them one after the other, and brought a whole apronful down with her. the mother took them away from her, and instead of treating poor two-eyes any better for this, she and one-eye and three-eyes were only envious, because two-eyes alone had been able to get the fruit, and they treated her still more cruelly.
it so befell that once when they were all standing together by the tree, a young knight came up. “quick, two-eyes,” cried the two sisters, “creep under this, and don’t disgrace us!” and with all speed they turned an empty barrel which was standing close by the tree over poor two-eyes, and they pushed the golden apples which she had been gathering, under it too. when the knight came nearer he was a handsome lord, who stopped and admired the magnificent gold and silver tree, and said to the two sisters, “to whom does this fine tree belong? any one who would bestow one branch of it on me might in return for it ask whatsoever he desired.” then one-eye and three-eyes replied that the tree belonged to them, and that they would give him a branch. they both took great trouble, but they were not able to do it, for the branches and fruit both moved away from them every time. then said the knight, “it is very strange that the tree should belong to you, and that you should still not be able to break a piece off.” they again asserted that the tree was their property. whilst they were saying so, two-eyes rolled out a couple of golden apples from under the barrel to the feet of the knight, for she was vexed with one-eye and three-eyes, for not speaking the truth. when the knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where they came from. one-eye and three-eyes answered that they had another sister, who was not allowed to show herself, for she had only two eyes like any common person. the knight, however, desired to see her, and cried, “two-eyes, come forth.” then two-eyes, quite comforted, came from beneath the barrel, and the knight was surprised at her great beauty, and said, “thou, two-eyes, canst certainly break off a branch from the tree for me.” “yes,” replied two-eyes, “that i certainly shall be able to do, for the tree belongs to me.” and she climbed up, and with the greatest ease broke off a branch with beautiful silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave it to the knight.
then said the knight, “two-eyes, what shall i give thee for it?”
“alas!” answered two-eyes, “i suffer from hunger and thirst, grief and want, from early morning till late night; if you would take me with you, and deliver me from these things, i should be happy.” so the knight lifted two-eyes on to his horse, and took her home with him to his father’s castle, and there he gave her beautiful clothes, and meat and drink to her heart’s content, and as he loved her so much he married her, and the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing. when two-eyes was thus carried away by the handsome knight, her two sisters grudged her good fortune in downright earnest. “the wonderful tree, however, still remains with us,” thought they, “and even if we can gather no fruit from it, still every one will stand still and look at it, and come to us and admire it. who knows what good things may be in store for us?” but next morning, the tree had vanished, and all their hopes were at an end. and when two-eyes looked out of the window of her own little room, to her great delight it was standing in front of it, and so it had followed her.
two-eyes lived a long time in happiness. once two poor women came to her in her castle, and begged for alms. she looked in their faces, and recognized her sisters, one-eye, and three-eyes, who had fallen into such poverty that they had to wander about and beg their bread from door to door. two-eyes, however, made them welcome, and was kind to them, and took care of them, so that they both with all their hearts repented the evil that they had done their sister in their youth.
131 fair katrinelje and pif-paf-poltrie
“good-day, father hollenthe.” “many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie.” “may i be allowed to have your daughter?” “oh, yes, if mother malcho (milch-cow), brother high-and-mighty, sister käsetraut, and fair katrinelje are willing, you can have her.”
“where is mother malcho, then?” “she is in the cow-house, milking the cow.”
“good-day, mother malcho.” “many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie.” “may i be allowed to have your daughter?” “oh, yes, if father hollenthe, brother high-and-mighty, sister käsetraut, and fair katrinelje are willing, you can have her.” “where is brother high-and-mighty, then?” “he is in the room chopping some wood.” “good-day, brother high-and-mighty.” “many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie.” “may i be allowed to have your sister?” “oh, yes, if father hollenthe, mother malcho, sister käsetraut, and fair katrinelje are willing, you can have her.” “where is sister käsetraut, then?” “she is in the garden cutting cabbages.” “good-day, sister käsetraut.” “many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie.” “may i be allowed to have your sister?” “oh, yes, if father hollenthe, mother malcho, brother high-and-mighty, and fair katrinelje are willing, you may have her.”
“where is fair katrinelje, then?” “she is in the room counting out her farthings.” “good day, fair katrinelje.” “many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie.” “wilt thou be my bride?” “oh, yes, if father hollenthe, mother malcho, brother high-and-mighty, and sister käsetraut are willing, i am ready.”
“fair katrinelje, how much dowry do hast thou?” “fourteen farthings in ready money, three and a half groschen owing to me, half a pound of dried apples, a handful of fried bread, and a handful of spices.
and many other things are mine, have i not a dowry fine?
“pif-paf-poltrie, what is thy trade? art thou a tailor?” “something better.” “a shoemaker?” “something better.” “a husbandman?” “something better.” “a joiner?” “something better.” “a smith?” “something better.”
“a miller?” “something better.” “perhaps a broom-maker?” “yes, that’s what i am, is it not a fine trade?”
132 the fox and the horse
a peasant had a faithful horse which had grown old and could do no more work, so his master would no longer give him anything to eat and said, “i can certainly make no more use of thee, but still i mean well by thee; if thou provest thyself still strong enough to bring me a lion here, i will maintain thee, but now take thyself away out of my stable,” and with that he chased him into the open country. the horse was sad, and went to the forest to seek a little protection there from the weather. then the fox met him and said, “why dost thou hang thy head so, and go about all alone?” “alas,” replied the horse, “avarice and fidelity do not dwell together in one house. my master has forgotten what services i have performed for him for so many years, and because i can no longer plough well, he will give me no more food, and has driven me out.” “without giving thee a chance?” asked the fox. “the chance was a bad one. he said, if i were still strong enough to bring him a lion, he would keep me, but he well knows that i cannot do that.”
the fox said, “i will help thee, just lay thyself down, stretch thyself out, as if thou wert dead, and do not stir.” the horse did as the fox desired, and the fox went to the lion, who had his den not far off, and said, “a dead horse is lying outside there, just come with me, thou canst have a rich meal.” the lion went with him, and when they were both standing by the horse the fox said, “after all, it is not very comfortable for thee here i tell thee what i will fasten it to thee by the tail, and then thou canst drag it into thy cave, and devour it in peace.”
this advice pleased the lion: he lay down, and in order that the fox might tie the horse fast to him, he kept quite quiet. but the fox tied the lion’s legs together with the horse’s tail, and twisted and fastened all so well and so strongly that no strength could break it.
when he had finished his work, he tapped the horse on the shoulder and said, “pull, white horse, pull.” then up sprang the horse at once, and drew the lion away with him. the lion began to roar so that all the birds in the forest flew out in terror, but the horse let him roar, and drew him and dragged him over the country to his master’s door. when the master saw the lion, he was of a better mind, and said to the horse, “thou shalt stay with me and fare well,” and he gave him plenty to eat until he died.
133 the shoes that were danced to pieces
there was once upon a time a king who had twelve daughters, each one more beautiful than the other. they all slept together in one chamber, in which their beds stood side by side, and every night when they were in them the king locked the door, and bolted it. but in the morning when he unlocked the door, he saw that their shoes were worn out with dancing, and no one could find out how that had come to pass. then the king caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever could discover where they danced at night, should choose one of them for his wife and be king after his death, but that whosoever came forward and had not discovered it within three days and nights, should have forfeited his life. it was not long before a king’s son presented himself, and offered to undertake the enterprise. he was well received, and in the evening was led into a room adjoining the princesses’ sleeping-chamber.
his bed was placed there, and he was to observe where they went and danced, and in order that they might do nothing secretly or go away to some other place, the door of their room was left open.
but the eyelids of the prince grew heavy as lead, and he fell asleep, and when he awoke in the morning, all twelve had been to the dance, for their shoes were standing there with holes in the soles. on the second and third nights it fell out just the same, and then his head was struck off without mercy. many others came after this and undertook the enterprise, but all forfeited their lives. now it came to pass that a poor soldier, who had a wound, and could serve no longer, found himself on the road to the town where the king lived. there he met an old woman, who asked him where he was going. “i hardly know myself,”
answered he, and added in jest, “i had half a mind to discover where the princesses danced their shoes into holes, and thus become king.”
“that is not so difficult,” said the old woman, “you must not drink the wine which will be brought to you at night, and must pretend to be sound asleep.” with that she gave him a little cloak, and said, “if you put on that, you will be invisible, and then you can steal after the twelve.” when the soldier had received this good advice, he went into the thing in earnest, took heart, went to the king, and announced himself as a suitor. he was as well received as the others, and royal garments were put upon him. he was conducted that evening at bed-time into the ante-chamber, and as he was about to go to bed, the eldest came and brought him a cup of wine, but he had tied a sponge under his chin, and let the wine run down into it, without drinking a drop. then he lay down and when he had lain a while, he began to snore, as if in the deepest sleep. the twelve princesses heard that, and laughed, and the eldest said, “he, too, might as well have saved his life.” with that they got up, opened wardrobes, presses, cupboards, and brought out pretty dresses; dressed themselves before the mirrors, sprang about, and rejoiced at the prospect of the dance. only the youngest said, “i know not how it is; you are very happy, but i feel very strange; some misfortune is certainly about to befall us.” “thou art a goose, who art always frightened,” said the eldest. “hast thou forgotten how many kings’ sons have already come here in vain? i had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping-draught, in any case the clown would not have awakened.” when they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier, but he had closed his eyes and did not move or stir, so they felt themselves quite secure. the eldest then went to her bed and tapped it; it immediately sank into the earth, and one after the other they descended through the opening, the eldest going first. the soldier, who had watched everything, tarried no longer, put on his little cloak, and went down last with the youngest. half-way down the steps, he just trod a little on her dress; she was terrified at that, and cried out, “what is that? who is pulling my dress?” “don’t be so silly!” said the eldest, “you have caught it on a nail.” then they went all the way down, and when they were at the bottom, they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees, all the leaves of which were of silver, and shone and glistened. the soldier thought, “i must carry a token away with me,” and broke off a twig from one of them, on which the tree cracked with a loud report. the youngest cried out again.
“something is wrong, did you hear the crack?” but the eldest said, “it is a gun fired for joy, because we have got rid of our prince so quickly.” after that they came into an avenue where all the leaves were of gold, and lastly into a third where they were of bright diamonds; he broke off a twig from each, which made such a crack each time that the youngest started back in terror, but the eldest still maintained that they were salutes. they went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve little boats, and in every boat sat a handsome prince, all of whom were waiting for the twelve, and each took one of them with him, but the soldier seated himself by the youngest. then her prince said, “i can’t tell why the boat is so much heavier to-day; i shall have to row with all my strength, if i am to get it across.” “what should cause that,” said the youngest, “but the warm weather? i feel very warm too.”
on the opposite side of the lake stood a splendid, brightly-lit castle, from whence resounded the joyous music of trumpets and kettle-drums.
they rowed over there, entered, and each prince danced with the girl he loved, but the soldier danced with them unseen, and when one of them had a cup of wine in her hand he drank it up, so that the cup was empty when she carried it to her mouth; the youngest was alarmed at this, but the eldest always made her be silent. they danced there till three o’clock in the morning when all the shoes were danced into holes, and they were forced to leave off; the princes rowed them back again over the lake, and this time the soldier seated himself by the eldest. on the shore they took leave of their princes, and promised to return the following night. when they reached the stairs the soldier ran on in front and lay down in his bed, and when the twelve had come up slowly and wearily, he was already snoring so loudly that they could all hear him, and they said, “so far as he is concerned, we are safe.” they took off their beautiful dresses, laid them away, put the worn-out shoes under the bed, and lay down. next morning the soldier was resolved not to speak, but to watch the wonderful goings on, and again went with them. then everything was done just as it had been done the first time, and each time they danced until their shoes were worn to pieces. but the third time he took a cup away with him as a token. when the hour had arrived for him to give his answer, he took the three twigs and the cup, and went to the king, but the twelve stood behind the door, and listened for what he was going to say. when the king put the question, “where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes to pieces in the night?” he answered, “in an underground castle with twelve princes,”
and related how it had come to pass, and brought out the tokens. the king then summoned his daughters, and asked them if the soldier had told the truth, and when they saw that they were betrayed, and that falsehood would be of no avail, they were obliged to confess all.
thereupon the king asked which of them he would have to wife? he answered, “i am no longer young, so give me the eldest.” then the wedding was celebrated on the self-same day, and the kingdom was promised him after the king’s death. but the princes were bewitched for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve.
134 the six servants
in former times there lived an aged queen who was a sorceress, and her daughter was the most beautiful maiden under the sun. the old woman, however, had no other thought than how to lure mankind to destruction, and when a wooer appeared, she said that whosoever wished to have her daughter, must first perform a task, or die. many had been dazzled by the daughter’s beauty, and had actually risked this, but they never could accomplish what the old woman enjoined them to do, and then no mercy was shown; they had to kneel down, and their heads were struck off. a certain king’s son who had also heard of the maiden’s beauty, said to his father, “let me go there, i want to demand her in marriage.” “never,” answered the king; “if you were to go, it would be going to your death.” on this the son lay down and was sick unto death, and for seven years he lay there, and no physician could heal him. when the father perceived that all hope was over, with a heavy heart he said to him, “go thither, and try your luck, for i know no other means of curing you.” when the son heard that, he rose from his bed and was well again, and joyfully set out on his way.
and it came to pass that as he was riding across a heath, he saw from afar something like a great heap of hay lying on the ground, and when he drew nearer, he could see that it was the stomach of a man, who had laid himself down there, but the stomach looked like a small mountain.
when the fat man saw the traveller, he stood up and said, “if you are in need of any one, take me into your service.” the prince answered, “what can i do with such a great big man?” “oh,” said the stout one, “this is nothing, when i stretch myself out well, i am three thousand times fatter.” “if that’s the case,” said the prince, “i can make use of thee, come with me.” so the stout one followed the prince, and after a while they found another man who was lying on the ground with his ear laid to the turf. “what art thou doing there?” asked the king’s son. “i am listening,” replied the man. “what art thou listening to so attentively?” “i am listening to what is just going on in the world, for nothing escapes my ears; i even hear the grass growing.” “tell me,”
said the prince, “what thou hearest at the court of the old queen who has the beautiful daughter.” then he answered, “i hear the whizzing of the sword that is striking off a wooer’s head.” the king’s son said, “i can make use of thee, come with me.” they went onwards, and then saw a pair of feet lying and part of a pair of legs, but could not see the rest of the body. when they had walked on for a great distance, they came to the body, and at last to the head also. “why,” said the prince, “what a tall rascal thou art!” “oh,” replied the tall one, “that is nothing at all yet; when i really stretch out my limbs, i am three thousand times as tall, and taller than the highest mountain on earth.
i will gladly enter your service, if you will take me.” “come with me,”
said the prince, “i can make use of thee.” they went onwards and found a man sitting by the road who had bound up his eyes. the prince said to him, “hast thou weak eyes, that thou canst not look at the light?”
“no,” replied the man, “but i must not remove the bandage, for whatsoever i look at with my eyes, splits to pieces, my glance is so powerful. if you can use that, i shall be glad to serve you.” “come with me,” replied the king’s son, “i can make use of thee.” they journeyed onwards and found a man who was lying in the hot sunshine, trembling and shivering all over his body, so that not a limb was still. “how canst thou shiver when the sun is shining so warm?” said the king’s son. “alack,” replied the man, “i am of quite a different nature. the hotter it is, the colder i am, and the frost pierces through all my bones; and the colder it is, the hotter i am. in the midst of ice, i cannot endure the heat, nor in the midst of fire, the cold.” “thou art a strange fellow,” said the prince, “but if thou wilt enter my service, follow me.” they travelled onwards, and saw a man standing who made a long neck and looked about him, and could see over all the mountains. “what art thou looking at so eagerly?” said the king’s son. the man replied, “i have such sharp eyes that i can see into every forest and field, and hill and valley, all over the world.”
the prince said, “come with me if thou wilt, for i am still in want of such an one.”
and now the king’s son and his six servants came to the town where the aged queen dwelt. he did not tell her who he was, but said, “if you will give me your beautiful daughter, i will perform any task you set me.” the sorceress was delighted to get such a handsome youth as this into her net, and said, “i will set thee three tasks, and if thou art able to perform them all, thou shalt be husband and master of my daughter.” “what is the first to be?” “thou shalt fetch me my ring which i have dropped into the red sea.” so the king’s son went home to his servants and said, “the first task is not easy. a ring is to be got out of the red sea. come, find some way of doing it.” then the man with the sharp sight said, “i will see where it is lying,” and looked down into the water and said, “it is sticking there, on a pointed stone.”
the tall one carried them thither, and said, “i would soon get it out, if i could only see it.” “oh, is that all!” cried the stout one, and lay down and put his mouth to the water, on which all the waves fell into it just as if it had been a whirlpool, and he drank up the whole sea till it was as dry as a meadow. the tall one stooped down a little, and brought out the ring with his hand. then the king’s son rejoiced when he had the ring, and took it to the old queen. she was astonished, and said, “yes, it is the right ring. thou hast safely performed the first task, but now comes the second. dost thou see the meadow in front of my palace? three hundred fat oxen are feeding there, and these must thou eat, skin, hair, bones, horns and all, and down below in my cellar lie three hundred casks of wine, and these thou must drink up as well, and if one hair of the oxen, or one little drop of the wine is left, thy life will be forfeited to me.” “may i invite no guests to this repast?” inquired the prince, “no dinner is good without some company.”
the old woman laughed maliciously, and replied, “thou mayst invite one for the sake of companionship, but no more.”
the king’s son went to his servants and said to the stout one, “thou shalt be my guest to-day, and shalt eat thy fill.” hereupon the stout one stretched himself out and ate the three hundred oxen without leaving one single hair, and then he asked if he was to have nothing but his breakfast. he drank the wine straight from the casks without feeling any need of a glass, and he licked the last drop from his finger-nails. when the meal was over, the prince went to the old woman, and told her that the second task also was performed. she wondered at this and said, “no one has ever done so much before, but one task still remains,” and she thought to herself, “thou shalt not escape me, and wilt not keep thy head on thy shoulders! this night,” said she, “i will bring my daughter to thee in thy chamber, and thou shalt put thine arms round her, but when you are sitting there together, beware of falling asleep. when twelve o’clock is striking, i will come, and if she is then no longer in thine arms, thou art lost.” the prince thought, “the task is easy, i will most certainly keep my eyes open.” nevertheless he called his servants, told them what the old woman had said, and remarked, “who knows what treachery lurks behind this? foresight is a good thing keep watch, and take care that the maiden does not go out of my room again.” when night fell, the old woman came with her daughter, and gave her into the princes’s arms, and then the tall one wound himself round the two in a circle, and the stout one placed himself by the door, so that no living creature could enter. there the two sat, and the maiden spake never a word, but the moon shone through the window on her face, and the prince could behold her wondrous beauty. he did nothing but gaze at her, and was filled with love and happiness, and his eyes never felt weary. this lasted until eleven o’clock, when the old woman cast such a spell over all of them that they fell asleep, and at the self-same moment the maiden was carried away.
then they all slept soundly until a quarter to twelve, when the magic lost its power, and all awoke again. “oh, misery and misfortune!” cried the prince, “now i am lost!” the faithful servants also began to lament, but the listener said, “be quiet, i want to listen.” then he listened for an instant and said, “she is on a rock, three hundred leagues from hence, bewailing her fate. thou alone, tall one, canst help her; if thou wilt stand up, thou wilt be there in a couple of steps.”
“yes,” answered the tall one, “but the one with the sharp eyes must go with me, that we may destroy the rock.” then the tall one took the one with bandaged eyes on his back, and in the twinkling of an eye they were on the enchanted rock. the tall one immediately took the bandage from the other’s eyes, and he did but look round, and the rock shivered into a thousand pieces. then the tall one took the maiden in his arms, carried her back in a second, then fetched his companion with the same rapidity, and before it struck twelve they were all sitting as they had sat before, quite merrily and happily. when twelve struck, the aged sorceress came stealing in with a malicious face, which seemed to say, “now he is mine!” for she believed that her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues off. but when she saw her in the prince’s arms, she was alarmed, and said, “here is one who knows more than i do!” she dared not make any opposition, and was forced to give him her daughter.
but she whispered in her ear, “it is a disgrace to thee to have to obey common people, and that thou art not allowed to choose a husband to thine own liking.”
on this the proud heart of the maiden was filled with anger, and she meditated revenge. next morning she caused three hundred great bundles of wood to be got together, and said to the prince that though the three tasks were performed, she would still not be his wife until some one was ready to seat himself in the midst of the wood, and bear the fire. she thought that none of his servants would let themselves be burnt for him, and that out of love for her, he himself would place himself upon it, and then she would be free. but the servants said, “every one of us has done something except the frosty one, he must set to work,” and they put him in the middle of the pile, and set fire to it. then the fire began to burn, and burnt for three days until all the wood was consumed, and when the flames had burnt out, the frosty one was standing amid the ashes, trembling like an aspen leaf, and saying, “i never felt such a frost during the whole course of my life; if it had lasted much longer, i should have been benumbed!”
as no other pretext was to be found, the beautiful maiden was now forced to take the unknown youth as a husband. but when they drove away to church, the old woman said, “i cannot endure the disgrace,” and sent her warriors after them with orders to cut down all who opposed them, and bring back her daughter. but the listener had sharpened his ears, and heard the secret discourse of the old woman. “what shall we do?”
said he to the stout one. but he knew what to do, and spat out once or twice behind the carriage some of the sea-water which he had drunk, and a great sea arose in which the warriors were caught and drowned. when the sorceress perceived that, she sent her mailed knights; but the listener heard the rattling of their armour, and undid the bandage from one eye of sharp-eyes, who looked for a while rather fixedly at the enemy’s troops, on which they all sprang to pieces like glass. then the youth and the maiden went on their way undisturbed, and when the two had been blessed in church, the six servants took leave, and said to their master, “your wishes are now satisfied, you need us no longer, we will go our way and seek our fortunes.”
half a league from the palace of the prince’s father was a village near which a swineherd tended his herd, and when they came thither the prince said to his wife, “do you know who i really am? i am no prince, but a herder of swine, and the man who is there with that herd, is my father. we two shall have to set to work also, and help him.” then he alighted with her at the inn, and secretly told the innkeepers to take away her royal apparel during the night. so when she awoke in the morning, she had nothing to put on, and the innkeeper’s wife gave her an old gown and a pair of worsted stockings, and at the same time seemed to consider it a great present, and said, “if it were not for the sake of your husband i should have given you nothing at all!” then the princess believed that he really was a swineherd, and tended the herd with him, and thought to herself, “i have deserved this for my haughtiness and pride.” this lasted for a week, and then she could endure it no longer, for she had sores on her feet. and now came a couple of people who asked if she knew who her husband was. “yes,” she answered, “he is a swineherd, and has just gone out with cords and ropes to try to drive a little bargain.” but they said, “just come with us, and we will take you to him,” and they took her up to the palace, and when she entered the hall, there stood her husband in kingly raiment. but she did not recognize him until he took her in his arms, kissed her, and said, “i suffered much for thee and now thou, too, hast had to suffer for me.” and then the wedding was celebrated, and he who has told you all this, wishes that he, too, had been present at it.
135 the white bride and the black one
a woman was going about the unenclosed land with her daughter and her step-daughter cutting fodder, when the lord came walking towards them in the form of a poor man, and asked, “which is the way into the village?” “if you want to know,” said the mother, “seek it for yourself,” and the daughter added, “if you are afraid you will not find it, take a guide with you.” but the step-daughter said, “poor man, i will take you there, come with me.” then god was angry with the mother and daughter, and turned his back on them, and wished that they should become as black as night and as ugly as sin. to the poor step-daughter, however, god was gracious, and went with her, and when they were near the village, he said a blessing over her, and spake, “choose three things for thyself, and i will grant them to thee.” then said the maiden, “i should like to be as beautiful and fair as the sun,” and instantly she was white and fair as day. “then i should like to have a purse of money which would never grow empty.” that the lord gave her also, but he said, “do not forget what is best of all.” said she, “for my third wish, i desire, after my death, to inhabit the eternal kingdom of heaven.” that also was granted unto her, and then the lord left her.
when the step-mother came home with her daughter, and they saw that they were both as black as coal and ugly, but that the step-daughter was white and beautiful, wickedness increased still more in their hearts, and they thought of nothing else but how they could do her an injury. the step-daughter, however, had a brother called reginer, whom she loved much, and she told him all that had happened. once on a time reginer said to her, “dear sister, i will take thy likeness, that i may continually see thee before mine eyes, for my love for thee is so great that i should like always to look at thee.” then she answered, “but, i pray thee, let no one see the picture.” so he painted his sister and hung up the picture in his room; he, however, dwelt in the king’s palace, for he was his coachman. every day he went and stood before the picture, and thanked god for the happiness of having such a dear sister. now it happened that the king whom he served, had just lost his wife, who had been so beautiful that no one could be found to compare with her, and on this account the king was in deep grief. the attendants about the court, however, remarked that the coachman stood daily before this beautiful picture, and they were jealous of him, so they informed the king. then the latter ordered the picture to be brought to him, and when he saw that it was like his lost wife in every respect, except that it was still more beautiful, he fell mortally in love with it. he caused the coachman to be brought before him, and asked whom the portrait represented? the coachman said it was his sister, so the king resolved to take no one but her as his wife, and gave him a carriage and horses and splendid garments of cloth of gold, and sent him forth to fetch his chosen bride. when reginer came on this errand, his sister was glad, but the black maiden was jealous of her good fortune, and grew angry above all measure, and said to her mother, “of what use are all your arts to us now when you cannot procure such a piece of luck for me?” “be quiet,” said the old woman, “i will soon divert it to you,” and by her arts of witchcraft, she so troubled the eyes of the coachman that he was half-blind, and she stopped the ears of the white maiden so that she was half-deaf. then they got into the carriage, first the bride in her noble royal apparel, then the step-mother with her daughter, and reginer sat on the box to drive.
when they had been on the way for some time the coachman cried,
“cover thee well, my sister dear, that the rain may not wet thee, that the wind may not load thee with dust, that thou may’st be fair and beautiful when thou appearest before the king.”
the bride asked, “what is my dear brother saying?” “ah,” said the old woman, “he says that you ought to take off your golden dress and give it to your sister.” then she took it off, and put it on the black maiden, who gave her in exchange for it a shabby grey gown. they drove onwards, and a short time afterwards, the brother again cried,
“cover thee well, my sister dear, that the rain may not wet thee, that the wind may not load thee with dust, that thou may’st be fair and beautiful when thou appearest before the king.”
the bride asked, “what is my dear brother saying?” “ah,” said the old woman, “he says that you ought to take off your golden hood and give it to your sister.” so she took off the hood and put it on her sister, and sat with her own head uncovered. and they drove on farther. after a while, the brother once more cried,
“cover thee well, my sister dear, that the rain may not wet thee, that the wind may not load thee with dust, that thou may’st be fair and beautiful when thou appearest before the king.”
the bride asked, “what is my dear brother saying?” “ah,” said the old woman, “he says you must look out of the carriage.” they were, however, just on a bridge, which crossed deep water. when the bride stood up and leant forward out of the carriage, they both pushed her out, and she fell into the middle of the water. at the same moment that she sank, a snow-white duck arose out of the mirror-smooth water, and swam down the river. the brother had observed nothing of it, and drove the carriage on until they reached the court. then he took the black maiden to the king as his sister, and thought she really was so, because his eyes were dim, and he saw the golden garments glittering. when the king saw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride, he was very angry, and ordered the coachman to be thrown into a pit which was full of adders and nests of snakes. the old witch, however, knew so well how to flatter the king and deceive his eyes by her arts, that he kept her and her daughter until she appeared quite endurable to him, and he really married her.
one evening when the black bride was sitting on the king’s knee, a white duck came swimming up the gutter to the kitchen, and said to the kitchen-boy, “boy, light a fire, that i may warm my feathers.” the kitchen-boy did it, and lighted a fire on the hearth. then came the duck and sat down by it, and shook herself and smoothed her feathers to rights with her bill. while she was thus sitting and enjoying herself, she asked, “what is my brother reginer doing?” the scullery-boy replied, “he is imprisoned in the pit with adders and with snakes.”
then she asked, “what is the black witch doing in the house?” the boy answered, “she is loved by the king and happy.”
“may god have mercy on him,” said the duck, and swam forth by the sink.
the next night she came again and put the same questions, and the third night also. then the kitchen-boy could bear it no longer, and went to the king and discovered all to him. the king, however, wanted to see it for himself, and next evening went thither, and when the duck thrust her head in through the sink, he took his sword and cut through her neck, and suddenly she changed into a most beautiful maiden, exactly like the picture, which her brother had made of her. the king was full of joy, and as she stood there quite wet, he caused splendid apparel to be brought and had her clothed in it. then she told how she had been betrayed by cunning and falsehood, and at last thrown down into the water, and her first request was that her brother should be brought forth from the pit of snakes, and when the king had fulfilled this request, he went into the chamber where the old witch was, and asked, what does she deserve who does this and that? and related what had happened. then was she so blinded that she was aware of nothing and said, “she deserves to be stripped naked, and put into a barrel with nails, and that a horse should be harnessed to the barrel, and the horse sent all over the world.” all of which was done to her, and to her black daughter. but the king married the white and beautiful bride, and rewarded her faithful brother, and made him a rich and distinguished man.
136 iron john
there was once on a time a king who had a great forest near his palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. one day he sent out a huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. “perhaps some accident has befallen him,” said the king, and the next day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away. then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said, “scour the whole forest through, and do not give up until ye have found all three.” but of these also, none came home again, and of the pack of hounds which they had taken with them, none were seen more. from that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest, and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. this lasted for many years, when a strange huntsman announced himself to the king as seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. the king, however, would not give his consent, and said, “it is not safe in there; i fear it would fare with thee no better than with the others, and thou wouldst never come out again.” the huntsman replied, “lord, i will venture it at my own risk, of fear i know nothing.”
the huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. it was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of the water, seized it, and drew it under, when the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the water. when they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to his knees. they bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. there was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put in an iron cage in his court-yard, and forbade the door to be opened on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her keeping. and from this time forth every one could again go into the forest with safety.
the king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the court-yard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage. the boy ran thither and said, “give me my ball out.” “not till thou hast opened the door for me,” answered the man. “no,” said the boy, “i will not do that; the king has forbidden it,” and ran away. the next day he again went and asked for his ball; the wild man said, “open my door,” but the boy would not. on the third day the king had ridden out hunting, and the boy went once more and said, “i cannot open the door even if i wished, for i have not the key.” then the wild man said, “it lies under thy mother’s pillow, thou canst get it there.” the boy, who wanted to have his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. the door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. when it was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried away. the boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him, “oh, wild man, do not go away, or i shall be beaten!”
the wild man turned back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps into the forest. when the king came home, he observed the empty cage, and asked the queen how that had happened? she knew nothing about it, and sought the key, but it was gone. she called the boy, but no one answered. the king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but they did not find him. then he could easily guess what had happened, and much grief reigned in the royal court.
when the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy down from his shoulder, and said to him, “thou wilt never see thy father and mother again, but i will keep thee with me, for thou hast set me free, and i have compassion on thee. if thou dost all i bid thee, thou shalt fare well. of treasure and gold have i enough, and more than anyone in the world.” he made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the next morning the man took him to a well, and said, “behold, the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal, thou shalt sit beside it, and take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. i will come every evening to see if thou hast obeyed my order.” the boy placed himself by the margin of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a golden snake show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in. as he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he involuntarily put it in the water. he drew it quickly out again, but saw that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold off again, all was to no purpose. in the evening iron john came back, looked at the boy, and said, “what has happened to the well?” “nothing, nothing,” he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the man might not see it. but he said, “thou hast dipped thy finger into the water, this time it may pass, but take care thou dost not again let anything go in.” by daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and watching it. his finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head, and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well. he took it quickly out, but it was already quite gilded. iron john came, and already knew what had happened. “thou hast let a hair fall into the well,” said he. “i will allow thee to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the third time then the well is polluted, and thou canst no longer remain with me.”
on the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger, however much it hurt him. but the time was long to him, and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. and as he still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into the water. he raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of his head was already golden and shone like the sun. you may imagine how terrified the poor boy was! he took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it round his head, in order that the man might not see it. when he came he already knew everything, and said, “take the handkerchief off.” then the golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might, it was of no use. “thou hast not stood the trial, and canst stay here no longer. go forth into the world, there thou wilt learn what poverty is. but as thou hast not a bad heart, and as i mean well by thee, there is one thing i will grant thee; if thou fallest into any difficulty, come to the forest and cry, ‘iron john,’ and then i will come and help thee. my power is great, greater than thou thinkest, and i have gold and silver in abundance.”
then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city. there he looked for work, but could find none, and he had learnt nothing by which he could help himself. at length he went to the palace, and asked if they would take him in. the people about court did not at all know what use they could make of him, but they liked him, and told him to stay. at length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood and water, and rake the cinders together. once when it so happened that no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he kept his little cap on. such a thing as that had never yet come under the king’s notice, and he said, “when thou comest to the royal table thou must take thy hat off.” he answered, “ah, lord, i cannot; i have a bad sore place on my head.” then the king had the cook called before him and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his service; and that he was to turn him off at once.
the cook, however, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.
and now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear the wind and bad weather. once in summer when he was working alone in the garden, the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air might cool him. as the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell into the bed-room of the king’s daughter, and up she sprang to see what that could be. then she saw the boy, and cried to him, “boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.” he put his cap on with all haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. when he was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said, “how canst thou take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers? go quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest.” “oh, no,” replied the boy, “the wild ones have more scent, and will please her better.” when he got into the room, the king’s daughter said, “take thy cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.” he again said, “i may not, i have a sore head.” she, however, caught at his cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. he wanted to run out, but she held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. with these he departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. he took them to the gardener, and said, “i present them to thy children, they can play with them.” the following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and when he went in with it, she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him, but he held it fast with both hands. she again gave him a handful of ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for playthings for his children. on the third day things went just the same; she could not get his cap away from him, and he would not have her money.
not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. the king gathered together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty army. then said the gardener’s boy, “i am grown up, and will go to the wars also, only give me a horse.” the others laughed, and said, “seek one for thyself when we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the stable for thee.” when they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and got the horse out; it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jig, hobblety jig; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark forest. when he came to the outskirts, he called “iron john,”
three times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. thereupon the wild man appeared immediately, and said, “what dost thou desire?” “i want a strong steed, for i am going to the wars.” “that thou shalt have, and still more than thou askest for.” then the wild man went back into the forest, and it was not long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind them followed a great troop of soldiers entirely equipped in iron, and their swords flashed in the sun. the youth made over his three-legged horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the soldiers. when he got near the battle-field a great part of the king’s men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give way. then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. they began to fly, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there was not a single man left. instead, however, of returning to the king, he conducted his troop by bye-ways back to the forest, and called forth iron john. “what dost thou desire?” asked the wild man. “take back thy horse and thy troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.” all that he asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse. when the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and wished him joy of his victory. “i am not the one who carried away the victory,” said he, “but a stranger knight who came to my assistance with his soldiers.” the daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was, but the king did not know, and said, “he followed the enemy, and i did not see him again.” she inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but he smiled, and said, “he has just come home on his three-legged horse, and the others have been mocking him, and crying, “here comes our hobblety jig back again!”
they asked, too, “under what hedge hast thou been lying sleeping all the time?” he, however, said, “i did the best of all, and it would have gone badly without me.” and then he was still more ridiculed.”
the king said to his daughter, “i will proclaim a great feast that shall last for three days, and thou shalt throw a golden apple. perhaps the unknown will come to it.” when the feast was announced, the youth went out to the forest, and called iron john. “what dost thou desire?”
asked he. “that i may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.” “it is as safe as if thou hadst it already,” said iron john. “thou shalt likewise have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited chestnut-horse.” when the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one.
the king’s daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.
on the second day iron john equipped him as a white knight, and gave him a white horse. again he was the only one who caught the apple, and he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it. the king grew angry, and said, “that is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell his name.” he gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple, should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.
on the third day, he received from iron john a suit of black armour and a black horse, and again he caught the apple. but when he was riding off with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword.
the youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he had golden hair. they rode back and announced this to the king.
the following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his boy.
“he is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise shown my children three golden apples which he has won.”
the king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had his little cap on his head. but the king’s daughter went up to him and took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and he was so handsome that all were amazed. “art thou the knight who came every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught the three golden apples?” asked the king. “yes,” answered he, “and here the apples are,” and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them to the king. “if you desire further proof, you may see the wound which your people gave me when they followed me. but i am likewise the knight who helped you to your victory over your enemies.” “if thou canst perform such deeds as that, thou art no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is thy father?” “my father is a mighty king, and gold have i in plenty as great as i require.” “i well see,” said the king, “that i owe thanks to thee; can i do anything to please thee?” “yes,” answered he, “that indeed you can. give me your daughter to wife.” the maiden laughed, and said, “he does not stand much on ceremony, but i have already seen by his golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,” and then she went and kissed him. his father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son again. and as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a great retinue. he went up to the youth, embraced him and said, “i am iron john, and was by enchantment a wild man, but thou hast set me free; all the treasures which i possess, shall be thy property.”
137 the three black princesses
east india was besieged by an enemy who would not retire until he had received six hundred dollars. then the townsfolk caused it to be proclaimed by beat of drum that whosoever was able to procure the money should be burgomaster. now there was a poor fisherman who fished on the lake with his son, and the enemy came and took the son prisoner, and gave the father six hundred dollars for him. so the father went and gave them to the great men of the town, and the enemy departed, and the fisherman became burgomaster. then it was proclaimed that whosoever did not say, “mr. burgomaster,” should be put to death on the gallows.
the son got away again from the enemy, and came to a great forest on a high mountain. the mountain opened, and he went into a great enchanted castle, wherein chairs, tables, and benches were all hung with black.
then came three young princesses who were entirely dressed in black, but had a little white on their faces; they told him he was not to be afraid, they would not hurt him, and that he could deliver them. he said he would gladly do that, if he did but know how. at this, they told him he must for a whole year not speak to them and also not look at them, and what he wanted to have he was just to ask for, and if they dared give him an answer they would do so. when he had been there for a long while he said he should like to go to his father, and they told him he might go. he was to take with him this purse with money, put on this coat, and in a week he must be back there again.
then he was caught up, and was instantly in east india. he could no longer find his father in the fisherman’s hut, and asked the people where the poor fisherman could be, and they told him he must not say that, or he would come to the gallows. then he went to his father and said, “fisherman, how hast thou got here?” then the father said, “thou must not say that, if the great men of the town knew of that, thou wouldst come to the gallows.” he, however, would not stop, and was brought to the gallows. when he was there, he said, “o, my masters, just give me leave to go to the old fisherman’s hut.” then he put on his old smock-frock, and came back to the great men, and said, “do ye not now see? am i not the son of the poor fisherman? did i not earn bread for my father and mother in this dress?” hereupon his father knew him again, and begged his pardon, and took him home with him, and then he related all that had happened to him, and how he had got into a forest on a high mountain, and the mountain had opened and he had gone into an enchanted castle, where all was black, and three young princesses had come to him who were black except a little white on their faces. and they had told him not to fear, and that he could deliver them. then his mother said that might very likely not be a good thing to do, and that he ought to take a holy-water vessel with him, and drop some boiling water on their faces.
he went back again, and he was in great fear, and he dropped the water on their faces as they were sleeping, and they all turned half-white.
then all the three princesses sprang up, and said, “thou accursed dog, our blood shall cry for vengeance on thee! now there is no man born in the world, nor will any ever be born who can set us free! we have still three brothers who are bound by seven chains they shall tear thee to pieces.” then there was a loud shrieking all over the castle, and he sprang out of the window, and broke his leg, and the castle sank into the earth again, the mountain shut to again, and no one knew where the castle had stood.
138 knoist and his three sons
between werrel and soist there lived a man whose name was knoist, and he had three sons. one was blind, the other lame, and the third stark-naked. once on a time they went into a field, and there they saw a hare. the blind one shot it, the lame one caught it, the naked one put it in his pocket. then they came to a mighty big lake, on which there were three boats, one sailed, one sank, the third had no bottom to it. they all three got into the one with no bottom to it. then they came to a mighty big forest in which there was a mighty big tree; in the tree was a mighty big chapel in the chapel was a sexton made of beech-wood and a box-wood parson, who dealt out holy-water with cudgels.
“how truly happy is that one who can from holy water run!”
139 the maid of brakel
a girl from brakel once went to st. anne’s chapel at the foot of the hinnenberg, and as she wanted to have a husband, and thought there was no one else in the chapel, she sang,
“oh, holy saint anne!
help me soon to a man.
thou know’st him right well, by suttmer gate does he dwell, his hair it is golden, thou know’st him right well.”
the clerk, however, was standing behind the altar and heard that, so he cried in a very gruff voice, “thou shalt not have him! thou shalt not have him!” the maiden thought that the child mary who stood by her mother anne had called out that to her, and was angry, and cried, “fiddle de dee, conceited thing, hold your tongue, and let your mother speak!”
140 domestic servants
“whither goest thou?” “to walpe.” “i to walpe, thou to walpe, so, so, together we’ll go.”
“hast thou a man? what is his name?” “cham.” “my man cham, thy man cham; i to walpe, thou to walpe; so, so, together we’ll go.” “hast thou a child; how is he styled?” “wild.” “my child wild, thy child wild; my man cham, thy man cham; i to walpe, thou to walpe, so, so, together we’ll go.” “hast thou a cradle? how callest thou thy cradle?”
“hippodadle.” “my cradle hippodadle, my child wild, thy child wild, my man cham, thy man cham; i to walpe, thou to walpe, so, so, together we’ll go.”
“hast thou also a drudge? what name has thy drudge?”
“from-thy-work-do-not-budge.” “my drudge, from-thy-work-do-not-budge:
my child wild, thy child wild; my man cham, thy man cham; i to walpe, thou to walpe; so, so, together we’ll go.”
141 the lambkin and the little fish
there were once a little brother and a little sister, who loved each other with all their hearts. their own mother was, however, dead, and they had a step-mother, who was not kind to them, and secretly did everything she could to hurt them. it so happened that the two were playing with other children in a meadow before the house, and there was a pond in the meadow which came up to one side of the house. the children ran about it, and caught each other, and played at counting out.
“eneke beneke, let me live, and i to thee my bird will give.
the little bird, it straw shall seek, the straw i’ll give to the cow to eat.
the pretty cow shall give me milk, the milk i’ll to the baker take.
the baker he shall bake a cake, the cake i’ll give unto the cat.
the cat shall catch some mice for that, the mice i’ll hang up in the smoke, and then you’ll see the snow.”
they stood in a circle while they played this, and the one to whom the word snow fell, had to run away and all the others ran after him and caught him. as they were running about so merrily the step-mother watched them from the window, and grew angry. and as she understood arts of witchcraft she bewitched them both, and changed the little brother into a fish, and the little sister into a lamb. then the fish swam here and there about the pond and was very sad, and the lambkin walked up and down the meadow, and was miserable, and could not eat or touch one blade of grass. thus passed a long time, and then strangers came as visitors to the castle. the false step-mother thought, “this is a good opportunity,” and called the cook and said to him, “go and fetch the lamb from the meadow and kill it, we have nothing else for the visitors.” then the cook went away and got the lamb, and took it into the kitchen and tied its feet, and all this it bore patiently. when he had drawn out his knife and was whetting it on the door-step to kill the lamb, he noticed a little fish swimming backwards and forwards in the water, in front of the kitchen-sink and looking up at him. this, however, was the brother, for when the fish saw the cook take the lamb away, it followed them and swam along the pond to the house; then the lamb cried down to it,
“ah, brother, in the pond so deep, how sad is my poor heart!
even now the cook he whets his knife to take away my tender life.”
the little fish answered,
“ah, little sister, up on high how sad is my poor heart while in this pond i lie.”
when the cook heard that the lambkin could speak and said such sad words to the fish down below, he was terrified and thought this could be no common lamb, but must be bewitched by the wicked woman in the house. then said he, “be easy, i will not kill thee,” and took another sheep and made it ready for the guests, and conveyed the lambkin to a good peasant woman, to whom he related all that he had seen and heard.
the peasant was, however, the very woman who had been foster-mother to the little sister, and she suspected at once who the lamb was, and went with it to a wise woman. then the wise woman pronounced a blessing over the lambkin and the little fish, by means of which they regained their human forms, and after this she took them both into a little hut in a great forest, where they lived alone, but were contented and happy.
142 simeli mountain
there were once two brothers, the one rich, the other poor. the rich one, however, gave nothing to the poor one, and he gained a scanty living by trading in corn, and often did so badly that he had no bread for his wife and children. once when he was wheeling a barrow through the forest he saw, on one side of him, a great, bare, naked-looking mountain, and as he had never seen it before, he stood still and stared at it with amazement.
while he was thus standing he saw twelve great, wild men coming towards him, and as he believed they were robbers he pushed his barrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to see what would happen. the twelve men, however, went to the mountain and cried, “semsi mountain, semsi mountain, open,” and immediately the barren mountain opened down the middle, and the twelve went into it, and as soon as they were within, it shut. after a short time, however, it opened again, and the men came forth carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders, and when they were all once more in the daylight they said, “semsi mountain, semsi mountain, shut thyself;” then the mountain closed together, and there was no longer any entrance to be seen to it, and the twelve went away.
when they were quite out of sight the poor man got down from the tree, and was curious to know what really was secretly hidden in the mountain. so he went up to it and said, “semsi mountain, semsi mountain, open,” and the mountain opened to him also. the he went inside, and the whole mountain was a cavern full of silver and gold, and behind lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels, heaped up like corn. the poor man hardly knew what to do, and whether he might take any of these treasures for himself or not; but at last he filled his pockets with gold, but he left the pearls and precious stones where they were. when he came out again he also said, “semsi mountain, semsi mountain, shut thyself;” and the mountain closed itself, and he went home with his barrow.
and now he had no more cause for anxiety, but could buy bread for his wife and children with his gold, and wine into the bargain. he lived joyously and uprightly, gave help to the poor, and did good to every one. when, however, the money came to an end he went to his brother, borrowed a measure that held a bushel, and brought himself some more, but did not touch any of the most valuable things. when for the third time he wanted to fetch something, he again borrowed the measure of his brother. the rich man had, however, long been envious of his brother’s possessions, and of the handsome way of living which he had set on foot, and could not understand from whence the riches came, and what his brother wanted with the measure. then he thought of a cunning trick, and covered the bottom of the measure with pitch, and when he got the measure back a piece of money was sticking in it. he at once went to his brother and asked him, “what hast thou been measuring in the bushel measure?” “corn and barley,” said the other. then he showed him the piece of money, and threatened that if he did not tell the truth he would accuse him before a court of justice. the poor man then told him everything, just as it happened. the rich man, however, ordered his carriage to be made ready, and drove away, resolved to use the opportunity better than his brother had done, and to bring back with him quite different treasures.
when he came to the mountain he cried, “semsi mountain, semsi mountain, open.” the mountain opened, and he went inside it. there lay the treasures all before him, and for a long time he did not know which to clutch at first. at length he loaded himself with as many precious stones as he could carry. he wished to carry his burden outside, but, as his heart and soul were entirely full of the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain, and cried, “simeli mountain, simeli mountain, open.” that, however, was not the right name, and the mountain never stirred, but remained shut. then he was alarmed, but the longer he thought about it the more his thoughts confused themselves, and his treasures were no more of any use to him. in the evening the mountain opened, and the twelve robbers came in, and when they saw him they laughed, and cried out, “bird, have we caught thee at last! didst thou think we had never noticed that thou hadst been in here twice? we could not catch thee then; this third time thou shalt not get out again!” then he cried, “it was not i, it was my brother,” but let him beg for his life and say what he would, they cut his head off.
143 going a-travelling
there was once a poor woman who had a son, who much wished to travel, but his mother said, “how canst thou travel? we have no money at all for thee to take away with thee.” then said the son, “i will manage very well for myself; i will always say, not much, not much, not much.”
so he walked for a long time and always said, “not much, not much, not much.” then he passed by a company of fishermen and said, “god speed you! not much, not much, not much.” “what sayst thou churl, ‘not much?’” and when the net was drawn out they had not caught much fish.
so one of them fell on the youth with a stick and said, “hast thou never seen me threshing?” “what ought i to say, then?” asked the youth.
“thou must say, ‘get it full, get it full.’” after this he again walked a long time, and said, “get it full, get it full,” until he came to the gallows, where they had got a poor sinner whom they were about to hang.
then said he, “good morning; get it full, get it full.” “what sayst thou, knave, get it full? dost thou want to make out that there are still more wicked people in the world is not this enough?” and he again got some blows on his back. “what am i to say, then?” said he. “thou must say, may god have pity on the poor soul.”
again the youth walked on for a long while and said, “may god have pity on the poor soul!” then he came to a pit by which stood a knacker who was cutting up a horse. the youth said, “good morning; god have pity on the poor soul!” “what dost thou say, thou ill-tempered knave?” and the knacker gave him such a box on the ear, that he could not see out of his eyes. “what am i to say, then?” “thou must say, ‘there lies the carrion in the pit!’”
so he walked on, and always said, “there lies the carrion in the pit, there lies the carrion in the pit.” and he came to a cart full of people, so he said, “good morning, there lies the carrion in the pit!”
then the cart pushed him into a hole, and the driver took his whip and cracked it upon the youth, till he was forced to crawl back to his mother, and as long as he lived he never went out a-travelling again.
144 the donkey
once on a time there lived a king and a queen, who were rich, and had everything they wanted, but no children. the queen lamented over this day and night, and said, “i am like a field on which nothing grows.” at last god gave her her wish, but when the child came into the world, it did not look like a human child, but was a little donkey. when the mother saw that, her lamentations and outcries began in real earnest; she said she would far rather have had no child at all than have a donkey, and that they were to throw it into the water that the fishes might devour it. but the king said, “no, since god has sent him he shall be my son and heir, and after my death sit on the royal throne, and wear the kingly crown.” the donkey, therefore, was brought up and grew bigger, and his ears grew up beautifully high and straight. he was, however, of a merry disposition, jumped about, played and had especial pleasure in music, so that he went to a celebrated musician and said, “teach me thine art, that i may play the lute as well as thou dost.” “ah, dear little master,” answered the musician, “that would come very hard to you, your fingers are certainly not suited to it, and are far too big. i am afraid the strings would not last.” no excuses were of any use. the donkey was determined to play the lute; he was persevering and industrious, and at last learnt to do it as well as the master himself. the young lordling once went out walking full of thought and came to a well, he looked into it and in the mirror-clear water saw his donkey’s form. he was so distressed about it, that he went out into the wide world and only took with him one faithful companion. they travelled up and down, and at last they came into a kingdom where an old king reigned who had an only but wonderfully beautiful daughter. the donkey said, “here we will stay,” knocked at the gate, and cried, “a guest is without open, that he may enter.” as, however, the gate was not opened, he sat down, took his lute and played it in the most delightful manner with his two fore-feet. then the door-keeper opened his eyes most wonderfully wide, and ran to the king and said, “outside by the gate sits a young donkey which plays the lute as well as an experienced master!” “then let the musician come to me,”
said the king. when, however, a donkey came in, every one began to laugh at the lute-player. and now the donkey was asked to sit down and eat with the servants. he, however, was unwilling, and said, “i am no common stable-ass, i am a noble one.” then they said, “if that is what thou art, seat thyself with the men of war.” “no,” said he, “i will sit by the king.” the king smiled, and said good-humouredly, “yes, it shall be as thou wilt, little ass, come here to me.” then he asked, “little ass, how does my daughter please thee?” the donkey turned his head towards her, looked at her, nodded and said, “i like her above measure, i have never yet seen anyone so beautiful as she is.” “well, then, thou shalt sit next her too,” said the king. “that is exactly what i wish,”
said the donkey, and he placed himself by her side, ate and drank, and knew how to behave himself daintily and cleanly. when the noble beast had stayed a long time at the king’s court, he thought, “what good does all this do me, i shall still have to go home again?” let his head hang sadly, and went to the king and asked for his dismissal. but the king had grown fond of him, and said, “little ass, what ails thee? thou lookest as sour as a jug of vinegar, i will give thee what thou wantest. dost thou want gold?” “no,” said the donkey, and shook his head. “dost thou want jewels and rich dress?” “no.” “dost thou wish for half my kingdom?” “indeed, no.” then said the king, “if i did but know what would make thee content. wilt thou have my pretty daughter to wife?” “ah, yes,” said the ass, “i should indeed like her,” and all at once he became quite merry and full of happiness, for that was exactly what he was wishing for. so a great and splendid wedding was held. in the evening, when the bride and bridegroom were led into their bed-room, the king wanted to know if the ass would behave well, and ordered a servant to hide himself there. when they were both within, the bridegroom bolted the door, looked around, and as he believed that they were quite alone, he suddenly threw off his ass’s skin, and stood there in the form of a handsome royal youth. “now,” said he, “thou seest who i am, and seest also that i am not unworthy of thee.” then the bride was glad, and kissed him, and loved him dearly. when morning came, he jumped up, put his animal’s skin on again, and no one could have guessed what kind of a form was hidden beneath it. soon came the old king, “ah,” cried he, “is the little ass merry? but surely thou art sad?” said he to his daughter, “that thou hast not got a proper man for thy husband?” “oh, no, dear father, i love him as well as if he were the handsomest in the world, and i will keep him as long as i live.”
the king was surprised, but the servant who had concealed himself came and revealed everything to him. the king said, “that cannot be true.”
“then watch yourself the next night, and you will see it with your own eyes; and hark you, lord king, if you were to take his skin away and throw it in the fire, he would be forced to show himself in his true shape.” “thy advice is good,” said the king, and at night when they were asleep, he stole in, and when he got to the bed he saw by the light of the moon a noble-looking youth lying there, and the skin lay stretched on the ground. so he took it away, and had a great fire lighted outside, and threw the skin into it, and remained by it himself until it was all burnt to ashes. as, however, he was anxious to know how the robbed man would behave himself, he stayed awake the whole night and watched. when the youth had slept his sleep out, he got up by the first light of morning, and wanted to put on the ass’s skin, but it was not to be found. on this he was alarmed, and, full of grief and anxiety, said, “now i shall have to contrive to escape.” but when he went out, there stood the king, who said, “my son, whither away in such haste? what hast thou in mind? stay here, thou art such a handsome man, thou shalt not go away from me. i will now give thee half my kingdom, and after my death thou shalt have the whole of it.” “then i hope that what begins so well may end well, and i will stay with you,” said the youth. and the old man gave him half the kingdom, and in a year’s time, when he died, the youth had the whole, and after the death of his father he had another kingdom as well, and lived in all magnificence.
145 the ungrateful son
a man and his wife were once sitting by the door of their house, and they had a roasted chicken set before them, and were about to eat it together. then the man saw that his aged father was coming, and hastily took the chicken and hid it, for he would not permit him to have any of it. the old man came, took a drink, and went away. now the son wanted to put the roasted chicken on the table again, but when he took it up, it had become a great toad, which jumped into his face and sat there and never went away again, and if any one wanted to take it off, it looked venomously at him as if it would jump in his face, so that no one would venture to touch it. and the ungrateful son was forced to feed the toad every day, or else it fed itself on his face; and thus he went about the world without knowing rest.
146 the turnip
there were once two brothers who both served as soldiers; one of them was rich, and the other poor. then the poor one, to escape from his poverty, put off his soldier’s coat, and turned farmer. he dug and hoed his bit of land, and sowed it with turnip-seed. the seed came up, and one turnip grew there which became large and vigorous, and visibly grew bigger and bigger, and seemed as if it would never stop growing, so that it might have been called the princess of turnips, for never was such an one seen before, and never will such an one be seen again.
at length it was so enormous that by itself it filled a whole cart, and two oxen were required to draw it, and the farmer had not the least idea what he was to do with the turnip, or whether it would be a fortune to him or a misfortune. at last he thought, “if thou sellest it, what wilt thou get for it that is of any importance, and if thou eatest it thyself, why, the small turnips would do thee just as much good; it would be better to take it to the king, and make him a present of it.”
so he placed it on a cart, harnessed two oxen, took it to the palace, and presented it to the king. “what strange thing is this?” said the king. “many wonderful things have come before my eyes, but never such a monster as this! from what seed can this have sprung, or are you a luck-child and have met with it by chance?” “ah, no!” said the farmer, “no luck-child am i. i am a poor soldier, who because he could no longer support himself hung his soldier’s coat on a nail and took to farming land. i have a brother who is rich and well known to you, lord king, but i, because i have nothing, am forgotten by every one.”
then the king felt compassion for him, and said, “thou shalt be raised from thy poverty, and shalt have such gifts from me that thou shalt be equal to thy rich brother.” then he bestowed on him much gold, and lands, and meadows, and herds, and made him immensely rich, so that the wealth of the other brother could not be compared with his. when the rich brother heard what the poor one had gained for himself with one single turnip, he envied him, and thought in every way how he also could get hold of a similar piece of luck. he would, however, set about it in a much wiser way, and took gold and horses and carried them to the king, and made certain the king would give him a much larger present in return. if his brother had got so much for one turnip, what would he not carry away with him in return for such beautiful things as these? the king accepted his present, and said he had nothing to give him in return that was more rare and excellent than the great turnip.
so the rich man was obliged to put his brother’s turnip in a cart and have it taken to his home. when there he did not know on whom to vent his rage and anger, until bad thoughts came to him, and he resolved to kill his brother. he hired murderers, who were to lie in ambush, and then he went to his brother and said, “dear brother, i know of a hidden treasure, we will dig it up together, and divide it between us.” the other agreed to this, and accompanied him without suspicion. while they were on their way, however, the murderers fell on him, bound him, and would have hanged him to a tree. but just as they were doing this, loud singing and the sound of a horse’s feet were heard in the distance. on this their hearts were filled with terror, and they pushed their prisoner head first into the sack, hung it on a branch, and took to flight. he, however, worked up there until he had made a hole in the sack through which he could put his head. the man who was coming by was no other than a travelling student, a young fellow who rode on his way through the wood joyously singing his song. when he who was aloft saw that someone was passing below him, he cried, “good day! you have come at a lucky time.” the student looked round on every side, but did not know whence the voice came. at last he said, “who calls me?” then an answer came from the top of the tree, “raise your eyes; here i sit aloft in the sack of wisdom. in a short time have i learnt great things; compared with this all schools are a jest; in a very short time i shall have learnt everything, and shall descend wiser than all other men. i understand the stars, and the signs of the zodiac, and the tracks of the winds, the sand of the sea, the healing of illness, and the virtues of all herbs, birds, and stones. if you were once within it you would feel what noble things issue forth from the sack of knowledge.”
the student, when he heard all this, was astonished, and said, “blessed be the hour in which i have found thee! may not i also enter the sack for a while?” he who was above replied as if unwillingly, “for a short time i will let you get into it, if you reward me and give me good words; but you must wait an hour longer, for one thing remains which i must learn before i do it.” when the student had waited a while he became impatient, and begged to be allowed to get in at once, his thirst for knowledge was so very great. so he who was above pretended at last to yield, and said, “in order that i may come forth from the house of knowledge you must let it down by the rope, and then you shall enter it.” so the student let the sack down, untied it, and set him free, and then cried, “now draw me up at once,” and was about to get into the sack. “halt!” said the other, “that won’t do,” and took him by the head and put him upside down into the sack, fastened it, and drew the disciple of wisdom up the tree by the rope. then he swung him in the air and said, “how goes it with thee, my dear fellow? behold, already thou feelest wisdom coming, and art gaining valuable experience. keep perfectly quiet until thou becomest wiser.” thereupon he mounted the student’s horse and rode away, but in an hour’s time sent some one to let the student out again.
147 the old man made young again
in the time when our lord still walked this earth, he and st. peter stopped one evening at a smith’s and received free quarters. then it came to pass that a poor beggar, hardly pressed by age and infirmity, came to this house and begged alms of the smith. st. peter had compassion on him and said, “lord and master, if it please thee, cure his torments that he may be able to win his own bread.” the lord said kindly, “smith, lend me thy forge, and put on some coals for me, and then i will make this ailing old man young again.” the smith was quite willing, and st. peter blew the bellows, and when the coal fire sparkled up large and high our lord took the little old man, pushed him in the forge in the midst of the red-hot fire, so that he glowed like a rose-bush, and praised god with a loud voice. after that the lord went to the quenching tub, put the glowing little man into it so that the water closed over him, and after he had carefully cooled him, gave him his blessing, when behold the little man sprang nimbly out, looking fresh, straight, healthy, and as if he were but twenty. the smith, who had watched everything closely and attentively, invited them all to supper. he, however, had an old half-blind crooked, mother-in-law who went to the youth, and with great earnestness asked if the fire had burnt him much. he answered that he had never felt more comfortable, and that he had sat in the red heat as if he had been in cool dew. the youth’s words echoed in the ears of the old woman all night long, and early next morning, when the lord had gone on his way again and had heartily thanked the smith, the latter thought he might make his old mother-in-law young again likewise, as he had watched everything so carefully, and it lay in the province of his trade. so he called to ask her if she, too, would like to go bounding about like a girl of eighteen. she said, “with all my heart, as the youth has come out of it so well.” so the smith made a great fire, and thrust the old woman into it, and she writhed about this way and that, and uttered terrible cries of murder. “sit still; why art thou screaming and jumping about so?”
cried he, and as he spoke he blew the bellows again until all her rags were burnt. the old woman cried without ceasing, and the smith thought to himself, “i have not quite the right art,” and took her out and threw her into the cooling-tub. then she screamed so loudly that the smith’s wife upstairs and her daughter-in-law heard, and they both ran downstairs, and saw the old woman lying in a heap in the quenching-tub, howling and screaming, with her face wrinkled and shrivelled and all out of shape. thereupon the two, who were both with child, were so terrified that that very night two boys were born who were not made like men but apes, and they ran into the woods, and from them sprang the race of apes.
148 the lord’s animals and the devil’s
the lord god had created all animals, and had chosen out the wolf to be his dog, but he had forgotten the goat. then the devil made ready and began to create also, and created goats with fine long tails. now when they went to pasture, they generally remained caught in the hedges by their tails, then the devil had to go there and disentangle them, with a great deal of trouble. this enraged him at last, and he went and bit off the tail of every goat, as may be seen to this day by the stump.
then he let them go to pasture alone, but it came to pass that the lord god perceived how at one time they gnawed away at a fruitful tree, at another injured the noble vines, or destroyed other tender plants. this distressed him, so that in his goodness and mercy he summoned his wolves, who soon tore in pieces the goats that went there. when the devil observed this, he went before the lord and said, “thy creatures have destroyed mine.” the lord answered, “why didst thou create things to do harm?” the devil said, “i was compelled to do it: inasmuch as my thoughts run on evil, what i create can have no other nature, and thou must pay me heavy damages.” “i will pay thee as soon as the oak leaves fall; come then, thy money will then be ready counted out.” when the oak-leaves had fallen, the devil came and demanded what was due to him.
but the lord said, “in the church of constantinople stands a tall oak-tree which still has all its leaves.” with raging and curses, the devil departed, and went to seek the oak, wandered in the wilderness for six months before he found it, and when he returned, all the oaks had in the meantime covered themselves again with green leaves. then he had to forfeit his indemnity, and in his rage he put out the eyes of all the remaining goats, and put his own in instead.
this is why all goats have devil’s eyes, and their tails bitten off, and why he likes to assume their shape.
149 the beam
there was once an enchanter who was standing in the midst of a great crowd of people performing his wonders. he had a cock brought in, which lifted a heavy beam and carried it as if it were as light as a feather.
but a girl was present who had just found a bit of four-leaved clover, and had thus become so wise that no deception could stand out against her, and she saw that the beam was nothing but a straw. so she cried, “you people, do you not see that it is a straw that the cock is carrying, and no beam?” immediately the enchantment vanished, and the people saw what it was, and drove the magician away in shame and disgrace. he, however, full of inward anger, said, “i will soon revenge myself.”
after some time the girl’s wedding-day came, and she was decked out, and went in a great procession over the fields to the place where the church was. all at once she came to a stream which was very much swollen, and there was no bridge and no plank to cross it. then the bride nimbly took her clothes up, and wanted to wade through it. and just as she was thus standing in the water, a man, and it was the enchanter, cried mockingly close beside her, “aha! where are thine eyes that thou takest that for water?” then her eyes were opened, and she saw that she was standing with her clothes lifted up in the middle of a field that was blue with the flowers of blue flax. then all the people saw it likewise, and chased her away with ridicule and laughter.
150 the old beggar-woman
there was once an old woman, but thou hast surely seen an old woman go a-begging before now? this woman begged likewise, and when she got anything she said, “may god reward you.” the beggar-woman came to a door, and there by the fire a friendly rogue of a boy was standing warming himself. the boy said kindly to the poor old woman as she was standing shivering thus by the door, “come, old mother, and warm yourself.” she came in, but stood too near the fire, so that her old rags began to burn, and she was not aware of it. the boy stood and saw that, but he ought to have put the flames out. is it not true that he ought to have put them out? and if he had not any water, then should he have wept all the water in his body out of his eyes, and that would have supplied two pretty streams with which to extinguish them.
151 the three sluggards
a certain king had three sons who were all equally dear to him, and he did not know which of them to appoint as his successor after his own death. when the time came when he was about to die, he summoned them to his bedside and said, “dear children, i have been thinking of something which i will declare unto you; whichsoever of you is the laziest shall have the kingdom.” the eldest said, “then, father, the kingdom is mine, for i am so idle that if i lie down to rest, and a drop falls in my eye, i will not open it that i may sleep.” the second said; “father, the kingdom belongs to me, for i am so idle that when i am sitting by the fire warming myself, i would rather let my heel be burnt off than draw back my leg.” the third said, “father, the kingdom is mine, for i am so idle that if i were going to be hanged, and had the rope already round my neck, and any one put a sharp knife into my hand with which i might cut the rope, i would rather let myself be hanged than raise my hand to the rope.” when the father heard that, he said, “thou hast carried it the farthest, and shalt be king.”
151* the twelve idle servants
twelve servants who had done nothing all the day would not exert themselves at night either, but laid themselves on the grass and boasted of their idleness. the first said, “what is your laziness to me, i have to concern myself about mine own? the care of my body is my principal work, i eat not a little and drink still more. when i have had four meals, i fast a short time until i feel hunger again, and that suits me best. to rise betimes is not for me; when it is getting near mid-day, i already seek out a resting-place for myself. if the master call, i do exactly as if i had not heard him, and if he call for the second time, i wait awhile before i get up, and go to him very slowly.
in this way life is endurable.”
the second said, “i have a horse to look after, but i leave the bit in his mouth, and if i do not want to do it, i give him no food, and i say he has had it already. i, however, lay myself in the oat-chest and sleep for four hours. after this i stretch out one foot and move it a couple of times over the horse’s body, and then he is combed and cleaned. who is going to make a great business of that? nevertheless service is too toilsome for me.”
the third said, “why plague oneself with work? nothing comes of it! i laid myself in the sun, and fell asleep. it began to rain a little, but why should i get up? i let it rain on in god’s name. at last came a splashing shower, so heavy indeed, that it pulled the hair out of my head and washed it away, and i got a hole in the skull; i put a plaster on it, and then it was all right. i have already had several injuries of that kind.”
the fourth said, “if i am to undertake a piece of work, i first loiter about for an hour that i may save up my strength. after that i begin quite slowly, and ask if no one is there who could help me. then i let him do the chief of the work, and in reality only look on; but that also is still too much for me.”
the fifth said, “what does that matter? just think, i am to take away the manure from the horse’s stable, and load the cart with it. i let it go on slowly, and if i have taken anything on the fork, i only half-raise it up, and then i rest just a quarter of an hour until i quite throw it in. it is enough and to spare if i take out a cartful in the day. i have no fancy for killing myself with work.”
the sixth said, “shame on ye; i am afraid of no work, but i lie down for three weeks, and never once take my clothes off. what is the use of buckling your shoes on? for aught i care they may fall off my feet, it is no matter. if i am going up some steps, i drag one foot slowly after the other on to the first step, and then i count the rest of them that i may know where i must rest.”
the seventh said, “that will not do with me; my master looks after my work, only he is not at home the whole day. but i neglect nothing, i run as fast as it is possible to do when one crawls. if i am to get on, four sturdy men must push me with all their might. i came where six men were lying sleeping on a bed beside each other. i lay down by them and slept too. there was no wakening me again, and when they wanted to have me home, they had to carry me.” the eighth said, “i see plainly that i am the only active fellow; if a stone lie before me, i do not give myself the trouble to raise my legs and step over it. i lay myself down on the ground, and if i am wet and covered with mud and dirt, i stay lying until the sun has dried me again. at the very most, i only turn myself so that it can shine on me.” the ninth said, “that is the right way! to-day the bread was before me, but i was too idle to take it, and nearly died of hunger! moreover a jug stood by it, but it was so big and heavy that i did not like to lift it up, and preferred bearing thirst. just to turn myself round was too much for me, i remained lying like a log the whole day.” the tenth said, “laziness has brought misfortune on me, a broken leg and swollen calf. three of us were lying in the road, and i had my legs stretched out. some one came with a cart, and the wheels went over me. i might indeed have drawn my legs back, but i did not hear the cart coming, for the midges were humming about my ears, and creeping in at my nose and out again at my mouth; who can take the trouble to drive the vermin away?”
the eleventh said, “i gave up my place yesterday. i had no fancy for carrying the heavy books to my master any longer or fetching them away again. there was no end of it all day long. but to tell the truth, he gave me my dismissal, and would not keep me any longer, for his clothes, which i had left lying in the dust, were all moth-eaten, and i am very glad of it.”
the twelfth said, “to-day i had to drive the cart into the country, and made myself a bed of straw on it, and had a good sleep. the reins slipped out of my hand, and when i awoke, the horse had nearly torn itself loose, the harness was gone, the strap which fastened the horse to the shafts was gone, and so were the collar, the bridle and bit.
some one had come by, who had carried all off. besides this, the cart had got into a quagmire and stuck fast. i left it standing, and stretched myself on the straw again. at last the master came himself, and pushed the cart out, and if he had not come i should not be lying here but there, and sleeping in full tranquillity.”
152 the shepherd boy
there was once on a time a shepherd boy whose fame spread far and wide because of the wise answers which he gave to every question. the king of the country heard of it likewise, but did not believe it, and sent for the boy. then he said to him, “if thou canst give me an answer to three questions which i will ask thee, i will look on thee as my own child, and thou shalt dwell with me in my royal palace.” the boy said, “what are the three questions?” the king said, “the first is, how many drops of water are there in the ocean?” the shepherd boy answered, “lord king, if you will have all the rivers on earth dammed up so that not a single drop runs from them into the sea until i have counted it, i will tell you how many drops there are in the sea.” the king said, “the next question is, how many stars are there in the sky?” the shepherd boy said, “give me a great sheet of white paper,” and then he made so many fine points on it with a pen that they could scarcely be seen, and it was all but impossible to count them; any one who looked at them would have lost his sight. then he said, “there are as many stars in the sky as there are points on the paper; just count them.”
but no one was able to do it. the king said, “the third question is, how many seconds of time are there in eternity.” then said the shepherd boy, “in lower pomerania is the diamond mountain, which is two miles and a half high, two miles and a half wide, and two miles and a half in depth; every hundred years a little bird comes and sharpens its beak on it, and when the whole mountain is worn away by this, then the first second of eternity will be over.”
the king said, “thou hast answered the three questions like a wise man, and shalt henceforth dwell with me in my royal palace, and i will regard thee as my own child.”
153 the star-money
there was once on a time a little girl whose father and mother were dead, and she was so poor that she no longer had any little room to live in, or bed to sleep in, and at last she had nothing else but the clothes she was wearing and a little bit of bread in her hand which some charitable soul had given her. she was, however, good and pious.
and as she was thus forsaken by all the world, she went forth into the open country, trusting in the good god. then a poor man met her, who said, “ah, give me something to eat, i am so hungry!” she reached him the whole of her piece of bread, and said, “may god bless it to thy use,” and went onwards. then came a child who moaned and said, “my head is so cold, give me something to cover it with.” so she took off her hood and gave it to him; and when she had walked a little farther, she met another child who had no jacket and was frozen with cold. then she gave it her own; and a little farther on one begged for a frock, and she gave away that also. at length she got into a forest and it had already become dark, and there came yet another child, and asked for a little shirt, and the good little girl thought to herself, “it is a dark night and no one sees thee, thou canst very well give thy little shirt away,” and took it off, and gave away that also. and as she so stood, and had not one single thing left, suddenly some stars from heaven fell down, and they were nothing else but hard smooth pieces of money, and although she had just given her little shirt away, she had a new one which was of the very finest linen. then she gathered together the money into this, and was rich all the days of her life.
154 the stolen farthings
a father was one day sitting at dinner with his wife and his children, and a good friend who had come on a visit was with them. and as they thus sat, and it was striking twelve o’clock, the stranger saw the door open, and a very pale child dressed in snow-white clothes came in. it did not look around, and it did not speak; but went straight into the next room. soon afterwards it came back, and went out at the door again in the same quiet manner. on the second and on the third day, it came also exactly in the same way. at last the stranger asked the father to whom the beautiful child that went into the next room every day at noon belonged? “i have never seen it,” said he, neither did he know to whom it could belong. the next day when it again came, the stranger pointed it out to the father, who however did not see it, and the mother and the children also all saw nothing. on this the stranger got up, went to the room door, opened it a little, and peeped in. then he saw the child sitting on the ground, and digging and seeking about industriously amongst the crevices between the boards of the floor, but when it saw the stranger, it disappeared. he now told what he had seen and described the child exactly, and the mother recognized it, and said, “ah, it is my dear child who died a month ago.” they took up the boards and found two farthings which the child had once received from its mother that it might give them to a poor man; it, however, had thought, “thou canst buy thyself a biscuit for that,” and had kept the farthings, and hidden them in the openings between the boards; and therefore it had had no rest in its grave, and had come every day at noon to seek for these farthings. the parents gave the money at once to a poor man, and after that the child was never seen again.
155 brides on their trial
there was once a young shepherd who wished much to marry, and was acquainted with three sisters who were all equally pretty, so that it was difficult to him to make a choice, and he could not decide to give the preference to any one of them. then he asked his mother for advice, and she said, “invite all three, and set some cheese before them, and watch how they eat it.” the youth did so; the first, however, swallowed the cheese with the rind on; the second hastily cut the rind off the cheese, but she cut it so quickly that she left much good cheese with it, and threw that away also; the third peeled the rind off carefully, and cut neither too much nor too little. the shepherd told all this to his mother, who said, “take the third for thy wife.” this he did, and lived contentedly and happily with her.
156 odds and ends
there was once on a time a maiden who was pretty, but idle and negligent. when she had to spin she was so out of temper that if there was a little knot in the flax, she at once pulled out a whole heap of it, and strewed it about on the ground beside her. now she had a servant who was industrious, and gathered together the bits of flax which were thrown away, cleaned them, span them fine, and had a beautiful gown made out of them for herself. a young man had wooed the lazy girl, and the wedding was to take place. on the eve of the wedding, the industrious one was dancing merrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said,—
“ah, how that girl does jump about, dressed in my odds and ends.”
the bridegroom heard that, and asked the bride what she meant by it?
then she told him that the girl was wearing a dress make of the flax which she had thrown away. when the bridegroom heard that, and saw how idle she was, and how industrious the poor girl was, he gave her up and went to the other, and chose her as his wife.
157 the sparrow and his four children
a sparrow had four young ones in a swallow’s nest. when they were fledged, some naughty boys pulled out the nest, but fortunately all the birds got safely away in the high wind. then the old bird was grieved that as his sons had all gone out into the world, he had not first warned them of every kind of danger, and given them good instruction how to deal with each. in the autumn a great many sparrows assembled together in a wheatfield, and there the old bird met his four children again, and full of joy took them home with him. “ah, my dear sons, what pain i have been in about you all through the summer, because you got away in the wind without my teaching; listen to my words, obey your father, and be well on your guard. little birds have to encounter great dangers!” and then he asked the eldest where he had spent the summer, and how he had supported himself? “i stayed in the gardens, and looked for caterpillars and small worms, until the cherries got ripe.” “ah, my son,” said the father, “tit-bits are not bad, but there is great risk about them; on that account take great care of thyself henceforth, and particularly when people are going about the gardens who carry long green poles which are hollow inside and have a little hole at the top.”
“yes, father, but what if a little green leaf is stuck over the hole with wax?” said the son. “where hast thou seen that?” “in a merchant’s garden,” said the youngster. “oh, my son, merchant folks are quick folks,” said the father. “if thou hast been among the children of the world, thou hast learned worldly shiftiness enough, only see that thou usest it well, and do not be too confident.” after this he asked the next, “where hast thou passed thy time?” “at court,” said the son.
“sparrows and silly little birds are of no use in that place—there one finds much gold, velvet, silk, armour, harnesses, sparrow-hawks, screech-owls and hen-harriers; keep to the horses’ stable where they winnow oats, or thresh, and then fortune may give thee thy daily grain of corn in peace.” “yes, father,” said the son, “but when the stable-boys make traps and fix their gins and snares in the straw, many a one is caught fast.” “where hast thou seen that?” said the old bird.
“at court, among the stable-boys.” “oh, my son, court boys are bad boys! if thou hast been to court and among the lords, and hast left no feathers there, thou hast learnt a fair amount, and wilt know very well how to go about the world, but look around thee and above thee, for the wolves devour the wisest dogs.” the father examined the third also:
“where didst thou seek thy safety?” “i have broken up tubs and ropes on the cart-roads and highways, and sometimes met with a grain of corn or barley.” “that is indeed dainty fare,” said the father, “but take care what thou art about and look carefully around, especially when thou seest any one stooping and about to pick up a stone, there is not much time to stay then.” “that is true,” said the son, “but what if any one should carry a bit of rock, or ore, ready beforehand in his breast or pocket?” “where hast thou seen that?” “among the mountaineers, dear father; when they go out, they generally take little bits of ore with them.” “mountain folks are working folks, and clever folks. if thou hast been among mountain lads, thou hast seen and learnt something, but when thou goest thither beware, for many a sparrow has been brought to a bad end by a mountain boy.” at length the father came to the youngest son: “thou, my dear chirping nestling, wert always the silliest and weakest; stay with me, the world has many rough, wicked birds which have crooked beaks and long claws, and lie in wait for poor little birds and swallow them. keep with those of thine own kind, and pick up little spiders and caterpillars from the trees, or the house, and then thou wilt live long in peace.” “my dear father, he who feeds himself without injury to other people fares well, and no sparrow-hawk, eagle, or kite will hurt him if he specially commits himself and his lawful food, evening and morning, faithfully to god, who is the creator and preserver of all forest and village birds, who likewise heareth the cry and prayer of the young ravens, for no sparrow or wren ever falls to the ground except by his will.” “where hast thou learnt this?” the son answered, “when the great blast of wind tore me away from thee i came to a church, and there during the summer i have picked up the flies and spiders from the windows, and heard this discourse preached. the father of all sparrows fed me all the summer through, and kept me from all mischance and from ferocious birds.”
“in sooth, my dear son, if thou takest refuge in the churches and helpest to clear away spiders and buzzing flies, and criest unto god like the young ravens, and commendest thyself to the eternal creator, all will be well with thee, and that even if the whole world were full of wild malicious birds.”
“he who to god commits his ways, in silence suffers, waits, and prays, preserves his faith and conscience pure, he is of god’s protection sure.”
158 the story of schlauraffen land
in the time of schlauraffen i went there, and saw rome and the lateran hanging by a small silken thread, and a man without feet who outran a swift horse, and a keen sharp sword that cut through a bridge. there i saw a young ass with a silver nose which pursued two fleet hares, and a lime-tree that was very large, on which hot cakes were growing. there i saw a lean old goat which carried about a hundred cart-loads of fat on his body, and sixty loads of salt. have i not told enough lies? there i saw a plough ploughing without horse or cow, and a child of one year threw four millstones from ratisbon to treves, and from treves to strasburg, and a hawk swam over the rhine, which he had a perfect right to do. there i heard some fishes begin to make such a disturbance with each other, that it resounded as far as heaven, and sweet honey flowed like water from a deep valley at the top of a high mountain, and these were strange things. there were two crows which were mowing a meadow, and i saw two gnats building a bridge, and two doves tore a wolf to pieces; two children brought forth two kids, and two frogs threshed corn together. there i saw two mice consecrating a bishop, and two cats scratching out a bear’s tongue. then a snail came running up and killed two furious lions. there stood a barber and shaved a woman’s beard off; and two sucking-children bade their mother hold her tongue. there i saw two greyhounds which brought a mill out of the water; and a sorry old horse was beside it, and said it was right. and four horses were standing in the yard threshing corn with all their might, and two goats were heating the stove, and a red cow shot the bread into the oven.
then a cock crowed, cock-a-doodle-doo! the story is all told,—cock-a-doodle-doo!
159 the ditmarsch tale of wonders
i will tell you something. i saw two roasted fowls flying; they flew quickly and had their breasts turned to heaven and their backs to hell, and an anvil and a mill-stone swam across the rhine prettily, slowly, and gently, and a frog sat on the ice at whitsuntide and ate a ploughshare. three fellows who wanted to catch a hare, went on crutches and stilts; one of them was deaf, the second blind, the third dumb, and the fourth could not stir a step. do you want to know how it was done?
first, the blind man saw the hare running across the field, the dumb one called to the lame one, and the lame one seized it by the neck.
there were certain men who wished to sail on dry land, and they set their sails in the wind, and sailed away over great fields. then they sailed over a high mountain, and there they were miserably drowned. a crab was chasing a hare which was running away at full speed, and high up on the roof lay a cow which had climbed up there. in that country the flies are as big as the goats are here. open the window, that the lies may fly out.
160 a riddling tale
three women were changed into flowers which grew in the field, but one of them was allowed to be in her own home at night. then once when day was drawing near, and she was forced to go back to her companions in the field and become a flower again, she said to her husband, “if thou wilt come this afternoon and gather me, i shall be set free and henceforth stay with thee.” and he did so. now the question is, how did her husband know her, for the flowers were exactly alike, and without any difference? answer: as she was at her home during the night and not in the field, no dew fell on her as it did on the others, and by this her husband knew her.
161 snow-white and rose-red
there was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. in front of the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore white and the other red roses. she had two children who were like the two rose-trees, and one was called snow-white, and the other rose-red. they were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children in the world were, only snow-white was more quiet and gentle than rose-red. rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but snow-white sat at home with her mother, and helped her with her house-work, or read to her when there was nothing to do.
the two children were so fond of each another that they always held each other by the hand when they went out together, and when snow-white said, “we will not leave each other,” rose-red answered, “never so long as we live,” and their mother would add, “what one has she must share with the other.”
they often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. the little hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.
no mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss, and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and had no distress on their account.
once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near their bed. he got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing and went away into the forest. and when they looked round they found that they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces further. and their mother told them that it must have been the angel who watches over good children.
snow-white and rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that it was a pleasure to look inside it. in the summer rose-red took care of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother’s bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. in the winter snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the wrekin.
the kettle was of copper and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. in the evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said, “go, snow-white, and bolt the door,” and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls listened as they sat and span. and close by them lay a lamb upon the floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head hidden beneath its wings.
one evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, some one knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. the mother said, “quick, rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking shelter.” rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black head within the door.
rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered, and snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed. but the bear began to speak and said, “do not be afraid, i will do you no harm!
i am half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you.”
“poor bear,” said the mother, “lie down by the fire, only take care that you do not burn your coat.” then she cried, “snow-white, rose-red, come out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.” so they both came out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid of him. the bear said, “here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a little;” so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean; and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably. it was not long before they grew quite at home, and played tricks with their clumsy guest. they tugged his hair with their hands, put their feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a hazel-switch and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. but the bear took it all in good part, only when they were too rough he called out, “leave me alive, children,
“snowy-white, rosy-red, will you beat your lover dead?”
when it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the bear, “you can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from the cold and the bad weather.” as soon as day dawned the two children let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.
henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived.
when spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one morning to snow-white, “now i must go away, and cannot come back for the whole summer.” “where are you going, then, dear bear?” asked snow-white. “i must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked dwarfs. in the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves, does not easily see daylight again.”
snow-white was quite sorry for his going away, and as she unbolted the door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to snow-white as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about it. the bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the trees.
a short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest to get fire-wood. there they found a big tree which lay felled on the ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. when they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a snow-white beard a yard long. the end of the beard was caught in a crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping backwards and forwards like a dog tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.
he glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, “why do you stand there? can you not come here and help me?” “what are you about there, little man?” asked rose-red. “you stupid, prying goose!”
answered the dwarf; “i was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking. the little bit of food that one of us wants gets burnt up directly with thick logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. i had just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as i wished; but the wretched wood was too smooth and suddenly sprang asunder, and the tree closed so quickly that i could not pull out my beautiful white beard; so now it is tight in and i cannot get away, and the silly, sleek, milk-faced things laugh! ugh! how odious you are!”
the children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it was caught too fast. “i will run and fetch some one,” said rose-red.
“you senseless goose!” snarled the dwarf; “why should you fetch some one? you are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?” “don’t be impatient,” said snow-white, “i will help you,” and she pulled her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.
as soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it up, grumbling to himself, “uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine beard. bad luck to you!” and then he swung the bag upon his back, and went off without even once looking at the children.
some time after that snow-white and rose-red went to catch a dish of fish. as they came near the brook they saw something like a large grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
they ran to it and found it was the dwarf. “where are you going?” said rose-red; “you surely don’t want to go into the water?” “i am not such a fool!” cried the dwarf; “don’t you see that the accursed fish wants to pull me in?” the little man had been sitting there fishing, and unluckily the wind had twisted his beard with the fishing-line; just then a big fish bit, and the feeble creature had not strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the dwarf towards him.
he held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of little good, he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.
the girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast together. nothing was left but to bring out the scissors and cut the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. when the dwarf saw that he screamed out, “is that civil, you toad-stool, to disfigure one’s face? was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? now you have cut off the best part of it. i cannot let myself be seen by my people.
i wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!” then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without saying a word more he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.
it happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. the road led them across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn here and there. now they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a rock not far off. directly afterwards they heard a loud, piteous cry. they ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.
the children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man, and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
as soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried with his shrill voice, “could you not have done it more carefully! you dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you helpless clumsy creatures!” then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and slipped away again under the rock into his hole. the girls, who by this time were used to his thanklessness, went on their way and did their business in the town.
as they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot, and had not thought that anyone would come there so late. the evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with all colors so beautifully that the children stood still and looked at them. “why do you stand gaping there?” cried the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face became copper-red with rage. he was going on with his bad words when a loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out of the forest. the dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not get to his cave, for the bear was already close. then in the dread of his heart he cried, “dear mr. bear, spare me, i will give you all my treasures; look, the beautiful jewels lying there! grant me my life; what do you want with such a slender little fellow as i? you would not feel me between your teeth. come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!” the bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single blow with his paw, and he did not move again.
the girls had run away, but the bear called to them, “snow-white and rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, i will come with you.” then they knew his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly his bearskin fell off, and he stood there, a handsome man, clothed all in gold. “i am a king’s son,” he said, “and i was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; i have had to run about the forest as a savage bear until i was freed by his death. now he has got his well-deserved punishment.”
snow-white was married to him, and rose-red to his brother, and they divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered together in his cave. the old mother lived peacefully and happily with her children for many years. she took the two rose-trees with her, and they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful roses, white and red.
162 the wise servant
how fortunate is the master, and how well all goes in his house, when he has a wise servant who listens to his orders and does not obey them, but prefers following his own wisdom. a clever john of this kind was once sent out by his master to seek a lost cow. he stayed away a long time, and the master thought, “faithful john does not spare any pains over his work!” as, however, he did not come back at all, the master was afraid lest some misfortune had befallen him, and set out himself to look for him. he had to search a long time, but at last he perceived the boy who was running up and down a large field. “now, dear john,”
said the master when he had got up to him, “hast thou found the cow which i sent thee to seek?” “no, master,” he answered, “i have not found the cow, but then i have not looked for it.” “then what hast thou looked for, john?” “something better, and that luckily i have found.”
“what is that, john?” “three blackbirds,” answered the boy. “and where are they?” asked the master. “i see one of them, i hear the other, and i am running after the third,” answered the wise boy.
take example by this, do not trouble yourselves about your masters or their orders, but rather do what comes into your head and pleases you, and then you will act just as wisely as prudent john.
163 the glass coffin
let no one ever say that a poor tailor cannot do great things and win high honors; all that is needed is that he should go to the right smithy, and what is of most consequence, that he should have good luck.
a civil, adroit tailor’s apprentice once went out travelling, and came into a great forest, and, as he did not know the way, he lost himself.
night fell, and nothing was left for him to do, but to seek a bed in this painful solitude. he might certainly have found a good bed on the soft moss, but the fear of wild beasts let him have no rest there, and at last he was forced to make up his mind to spend the night in a tree.
he sought out a high oak, climbed up to the top of it, and thanked god that he had his goose with him, for otherwise the wind which blew over the top of the tree would have carried him away.
after he had spent some hours in the darkness, not without fear and trembling, he saw at a very short distance the glimmer of a light, and as he thought that a human habitation might be there, where he would be better off than on the branches of a tree, he got carefully down and went towards the light. it guided him to a small hut that was woven together of reeds and rushes. he knocked boldly, the door opened, and by the light which came forth he saw a little hoary old man who wore a coat made of bits of colored stuff sewn together. “who are you, and what do you want?” asked the man in a grumbling voice. “i am a poor tailor,” he answered, “whom night has surprised here in the wilderness, and i earnestly beg you to take me into your hut until morning.” “go your way,” replied the old man in a surly voice, “i will have nothing to do with runagates; seek for yourself a shelter elsewhere.” after these words he was about to slip into his hut again, but the tailor held him so tightly by the corner of his coat, and pleaded so piteously, that the old man, who was not so ill-natured as he wished to appear, was at last softened, and took him into the hut with him where he gave him something to eat, and then pointed out to him a very good bed in a corner.
the weary tailor needed no rocking; but slept sweetly till morning, but even then would not have thought of getting up, if he had not been aroused by a great noise. a violent sound of screaming and roaring forced its way through the thin walls of the hut. the tailor, full of unwonted courage, jumped up, put his clothes on in haste, and hurried out. then close by the hut, he saw a great black bull and a beautiful stag, which were just preparing for a violent struggle. they rushed at each other with such extreme rage that the ground shook with their trampling, and the air resounded with their cries. for a long time it was uncertain which of the two would gain the victory; at length the stag thrust his horns into his adversary’s body, whereupon the bull fell to the earth with a terrific roar, and was thoroughly despatched by a few strokes from the stag.
the tailor, who had watched the fight with astonishment, was still standing there motionless, when the stag in full career bounded up to him, and before he could escape, caught him up on his great horns. he had not much time to collect his thoughts, for it went in a swift race over stock and stone, mountain and valley, wood and meadow. he held with both hands to the tops of the horns, and resigned himself to his fate. it seemed, however, to him just as if he were flying away. at length the stag stopped in front of a wall of rock, and gently let the tailor down. the tailor, more dead than alive, required a longer time than that to come to himself. when he had in some degree recovered, the stag, which had remained standing by him, pushed its horns with such force against a door which was in the rock, that it sprang open. flames of fire shot forth, after which followed a great smoke, which hid the stag from his sight. the tailor did not know what to do, or whither to turn, in order to get out of this desert and back to human beings again. whilst he was standing thus undecided, a voice sounded out of the rock, which cried to him, “enter without fear, no evil shall befall you thee.” he hesitated, but driven by a mysterious force, he obeyed the voice and went through the iron-door into a large spacious hall, whose ceiling, walls and floor were made of shining polished square stones, on each of which were cut letters which were unknown to him. he looked at everything full of admiration, and was on the point of going out again, when he once more heard the voice which said to him, “step on the stone which lies in the middle of the hall, and great good fortune awaits thee.”
his courage had already grown so great that he obeyed the order. the stone began to give way under his feet, and sank slowly down into the depths. when it was once more firm, and the tailor looked round, he found himself in a hall which in size resembled the former. here, however, there was more to look at and to admire. hollow places were cut in the walls, in which stood vases of transparent glass which were filled with colored spirit or with a bluish vapour. on the floor of the hall two great glass chests stood opposite to each other, which at once excited his curiosity. when he went to one of them he saw inside it a handsome structure like a castle surrounded by farm-buildings, stables and barns, and a quantity of other good things. everything was small, but exceedingly carefully and delicately made, and seemed to be cut out by a dexterous hand with the greatest exactitude.
he might not have turned away his eyes from the consideration of this rarity for some time, if the voice had not once more made itself heard.
it ordered him to turn round and look at the glass chest which was standing opposite. how his admiration increased when he saw therein a maiden of the greatest beauty! she lay as if asleep, and was wrapped in her long fair hair as in a precious mantle. her eyes were closely shut, but the brightness of her complexion and a ribbon which her breathing moved to and fro, left no doubt that she was alive. the tailor was looking at the beauty with beating heart, when she suddenly opened her eyes, and started up at the sight of him in joyful terror. “just heaven!” cried she, “my deliverance is at hand! quick, quick, help me out of my prison; if thou pushest back the bolt of this glass coffin, then i shall be free.” the tailor obeyed without delay, and she immediately raised up the glass lid, came out and hastened into the corner of the hall, where she covered herself with a large cloak. then she seated herself on a stone, ordered the young man to come to her, and after she had imprinted a friendly kiss on his lips, she said, “my long-desired deliverer, kind heaven has guided thee to me, and put an end to my sorrows. on the self-same day when they end, shall thy happiness begin. thou art the husband chosen for me by heaven, and shalt pass thy life in unbroken joy, loved by me, and rich to overflowing in every earthly possession. seat thyself, and listen to the story of my life:
“i am the daughter of a rich count. my parents died when i was still in my tender youth, and recommended me in their last will to my elder brother, by whom i was brought up. we loved each other so tenderly, and were so alike in our way of thinking and our inclinations, that we both embraced the resolution never to marry, but to stay together to the end of our lives. in our house there was no lack of company; neighbors and friends visited us often, and we showed the greatest hospitality to every one. so it came to pass one evening that a stranger came riding to our castle, and, under pretext of not being able to get on to the next place, begged for shelter for the night. we granted his request with ready courtesy, and he entertained us in the most agreeable manner during supper by conversation intermingled with stories. my brother liked the stranger so much that he begged him to spend a couple of days with us, to which, after some hesitation, he consented. we did not rise from table until late in the night, the stranger was shown to room, and i hastened, as i was tired, to lay my limbs in my soft bed. hardly had i slept for a short time, when the sound of faint and delightful music awoke me. as i could not conceive from whence it came, i wanted to summon my waiting-maid who slept in the next room, but to my astonishment i found that speech was taken away from me by an unknown force. i felt as if a mountain were weighing down my breast, and was unable to make the very slightest sound. in the meantime, by the light of my night-lamp, i saw the stranger enter my room through two doors which were fast bolted. he came to me and said, that by magic arts which were at his command, he had caused the lovely music to sound in order to awaken me, and that he now forced his way through all fastenings with the intention of offering me his hand and heart. my repugnance to his magic arts was, however, so great, that i vouchsafed him no answer. he remained for a time standing without moving, apparently with the idea of waiting for a favorable decision, but as i continued to keep silence, he angrily declared he would revenge himself and find means to punish my pride, and left the room. i passed the night in the greatest disquietude, and only fell asleep towards morning. when i awoke, i hurried to my brother, but did not find him in his room, and the attendants told me that he had ridden forth with the stranger to the chase by daybreak.
“i at once suspected nothing good. i dressed myself quickly, ordered my palfrey to be saddled, and accompanied only by one servant, rode full gallop to the forest. the servant fell with his horse, and could not follow me, for the horse had broken its foot. i pursued my way without halting, and in a few minutes i saw the stranger coming towards me with a beautiful stag which he led by a cord. i asked him where he had left my brother, and how he had come by this stag, out of whose great eyes i saw tears flowing. instead of answering me, he began to laugh loudly. i fell into a great rage at this, pulled out a pistol and discharged it at the monster; but the ball rebounded from his breast and went into my horse’s head. i fell to the ground, and the stranger muttered some words which deprived me of consciousness.
“when i came to my senses again i found myself in this underground cave in a glass coffin. the magician appeared once again, and said he had changed my brother into a stag, my castle with all that belonged to it, diminished in size by his arts, he had shut up in the other glass chest, and my people, who were all turned into smoke, he had confined in glass bottles. he told me that if i would now comply with his wish, it was an easy thing for him to put everything back in its former state, as he had nothing to do but open the vessels, and everything would return once more to its natural form. i answered him as little as i had done the first time. he vanished and left me in my prison, in which a deep sleep came on me. amongst the visions which passed before my eyes, that was the most comforting in which a young man came and set me free, and when i opened my eyes to-day i saw thee, and beheld my dream fulfilled. help me to accomplish the other things which happened in those visions. the first is that we lift the glass chest in which my castle is enclosed, on to that broad stone.”
as soon as the stone was laden, it began to rise up on high with the maiden and the young man, and mounted through the opening of the ceiling into the upper hall, from whence they then could easily reach the open air. here the maiden opened the lid, and it was marvellous to behold how the castle, the houses, and the farm buildings which were enclosed, stretched themselves out and grew to their natural size with the greatest rapidity. after this, the maiden and the tailor returned to the cave beneath the earth, and had the vessels which were filled with smoke carried up by the stone. the maiden had scarcely opened the bottles when the blue smoke rushed out and changed itself into living men, in whom she recognized her servants and her people. her joy was still more increased when her brother, who had killed the magician in the form of the bull, came out of the forest towards them in his human form, and on the self-same day the maiden, in accordance with her promise, gave her hand at the altar to the lucky tailor.
164 lazy harry
harry was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do but drive his goat daily to pasture, he nevertheless groaned when he went home after his day’s work was done. “it is indeed a heavy burden,” said he, “and a wearisome employment to drive a goat into the field this way year after year, till late into the autumn! if one could but lie down and sleep, but no, one must have one’s eyes open lest it hurts the young trees, or squeezes itself through the hedge into a garden, or runs away altogether. how can one have any rest, or peace of one’s life?” he seated himself, collected his thoughts, and considered how he could set his shoulders free from this burden. for a long time all thinking was to no purpose, but suddenly it was as if scales fell from his eyes. “i know what i will do,” he cried, “i will marry fat trina who has also a goat, and can take mine out with hers, and then i shall have no more need to trouble myself.”
so harry got up, set his weary legs in motion, and went right across the street, for it was no farther, to where the parents of fat trina lived, and asked for their industrious and virtuous daughter in marriage. the parents did not reflect long. “birds of a feather, flock together,” they thought, and consented.
so fat trina became harry’s wife, and led out both the goats. harry had a good time of it, and had no work that he required to rest from but his own idleness. he only went out with her now and then, and said, “i merely do it that i may afterwards enjoy rest more, otherwise one loses all feeling for it.”
but fat trina was no less idle. “dear harry,” said she one day, “why should we make our lives so toilsome when there is no need for it, and thus ruin the best days of our youth? would it not be better for us to give the two goats which disturb us every morning in our sweetest sleep with their bleating, to our neighbor, and he will give us a beehive for them. we will put the beehive in a sunny place behind the house, and trouble ourselves no more about it. bees do not require to be taken care of, or driven into the field; they fly out and find the way home again for themselves, and collect honey without giving the very least trouble.” “thou hast spoken like a sensible woman,” replied harry. “we will carry out thy proposal without delay, and besides all that, honey tastes better and nourishes one better than goat’s milk, and it can be kept longer too.”
the neighbor willingly gave a beehive for the two goats. the bees flew in and out from early morning till late evening without ever tiring, and filled the hive with the most beautiful honey, so that in autumn harry was able to take a whole pitcherful out of it.
they placed the jug on a board which was fixed to the wall of their bed-room, and as they were afraid that it might be stolen from them, or that the mice might find it, trina brought in a stout hazel-stick and put it beside her bed, so that without unnecessary getting up she might reach it with her hand, and drive away the uninvited guests. lazy harry did not like to leave his bed before noon. “he who rises early,” said he, “wastes his substance.”
one morning when he was still lying amongst the feathers in broad daylight, resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, “women are fond of sweet things, and thou art always tasting the honey in private; it will be better for us to exchange it for a goose with a young gosling, before thou eatest up the whole of it.” “but,” answered trina, “not before we have a child to take care of them! am i to worry myself with the little geese, and spend all my strength on them to no purpose.” “dost thou think,” said harry, “that the youngster will look after geese? now-a-days children no longer obey, they do according to their own fancy, because they consider themselves cleverer than their parents, just like that lad who was sent to seek the cow and chased three blackbirds.” “oh,” replied trina, “this one shall fare badly if he does not do what i say! i will take a stick and belabour his skin for him with more blows than i can count. look, harry,” cried she in her zeal, and seized the stick which she had to drive the mice away with, “look, this is the way i will fall on him!” she reached her arm out to strike, but unhappily hit the honey-pitcher above the bed. the pitcher struck against the wall and fell down in fragments, and the fine honey streamed down on the ground. “there lie the goose and the young gosling,” said harry, “and want no looking after. but it is lucky that the pitcher did not fall on my head. we have all reason to be satisfied with our lot.” and then as he saw that there was still some honey in one of the fragments he stretched out his hand for it, and said quite gaily, “the remains, my wife, we will still eat with a relish, and we will rest a little after the fright we have had. what matters if we do get up a little later the day is always long enough.”
“yes,” answered trina, “we shall always get to the end of it at the proper time. dost thou know that the snail was once asked to a wedding and set out to go, but arrived at the christening. in front of the house it fell over the fence, and said, ‘speed does no good.’”
165 the griffin
there was once upon a time a king, but where he reigned and what he was called, i do not know. he had no son, but an only daughter who had always been ill, and no doctor had been able to cure her. then it was foretold to the king that his daughter should eat herself well with an apple. so he ordered it to be proclaimed throughout the whole of his kingdom, that whosoever brought his daughter an apple with which she could eat herself well, should have her to wife, and be king. this became known to a peasant who had three sons, and he said to the eldest, “go out into the garden and take a basketful of those beautiful apples with the red cheeks and carry them to the court; perhaps the king’s daughter will be able to eat herself well with them, and then thou wilt marry her and be king.” the lad did so, and set out.
when he had gone a short way he met a little iron man who asked him what he had there in the basket, to which replied uele, for so was he named, “frogs’ legs.” on this the little man said, “well, so shall it be, and remain,” and went away. at length uele arrived at the palace, and made it known that he had brought apples which would cure the king’s daughter if she ate them. this delighted the king hugely, and he caused uele to be brought before him; but, alas! when he opened the basket, instead of having apples in it he had frogs’ legs which were still kicking about. on this the king grew angry, and had him driven out of the house. when he got home he told his father how it had fared with him. then the father sent the next son, who was called seame, but all went with him just as it had gone with uele. he also met the little iron man, who asked what he had there in the basket. seame said, “hogs’
bristles,” and the iron man said, “well, so shall it be, and remain.”
when seame got to the king’s palace and said he brought apples with which the king’s daughter might eat herself well, they did not want to let him go in, and said that one fellow had already been there, and had treated them as if they were fools. seame, however, maintained that he certainly had the apples, and that they ought to let him go in. at length they believed him, and led him to the king. but when he uncovered the basket, he had but hogs’ bristles. this enraged the king most terribly, so he caused seame to be whipped out of the house. when he got home he related all that had befallen him, then the youngest boy, whose name was hans, but who was always called stupid hans, came and asked his father if he might go with some apples. “oh!” said the father, “thou wouldst be just the right fellow for such a thing! if the clever ones can’t manage it, what canst thou do?” the boy, however, did not believe him, and said, “indeed, father, i wish to go.” “just get away, thou stupid fellow, thou must wait till thou art wiser,” said the father to that, and turned his back. hans, however, pulled at the back of his smock-frock and said, “indeed, father, i wish to go.” “well, then, so far as i am concerned thou mayst go, but thou wilt soon come home again!” replied the old man in a spiteful voice. the boy, however, was tremendously delighted and jumped for joy. “well, act like a fool!
thou growest more stupid every day!” said the father again. hans, however, did not care about that, and did not let it spoil his pleasure, but as it was then night, he thought he might as well wait until the morrow, for he could not get to court that day. all night long he could not sleep in his bed, and if he did doze for a moment, he dreamt of beautiful maidens, of palaces, of gold, and of silver, and all kinds of things of that sort. early in the morning, he went forth on his way, and directly afterwards the little shabby-looking man in his iron clothes, came to him and asked what he was carrying in the basket. hans gave him the answer that he was carrying apples with which the king’s daughter was to eat herself well. “then,” said the little man, “so shall they be, and remain.” but at the court they would none of them let hans go in, for they said two had already been there who had told them that they were bringing apples, and one of them had frogs’ legs, and the other hogs’ bristles. hans, however, resolutely maintained that he most certainly had no frogs’ legs, but some of the most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom. as he spoke so pleasantly, the door-keeper thought he could not be telling a lie, and asked him to go in, and he was right, for when hans uncovered his basket in the king’s presence, golden-yellow apples came tumbling out. the king was delighted, and caused some of them to be taken to his daughter, and then waited in anxious expectation until news should be brought to him of the effect they had. but before much time had passed by, news was brought to him: but who do you think it was who came? it was his daughter herself! as soon as she had eaten of those apples, she was cured, and sprang out of her bed. the joy the king felt cannot be described! but now he did not want to give his daughter in marriage to hans, and said he must first make him a boat which would go quicker on dry land than on water. hans agreed to the conditions, and went home, and related how it had fared with him. then the father sent uele into the forest to make a boat of that kind. he worked diligently, and whistled all the time. at mid-day, when the sun was at the highest, came the little iron man and asked what he was making? uele gave him for answer, “wooden bowls for the kitchen.” the iron man said, “so it shall be, and remain.” by evening uele thought he had now made the boat, but when he wanted to get into it, he had nothing but wooden bowls. the next day seame went into the forest, but everything went with him just as it had done with uele. on the third day stupid hans went. he worked away most industriously, so that the whole forest resounded with the heavy strokes, and all the while he sang and whistled right merrily. at mid-day, when it was the hottest, the little man came again, and asked what he was making? “a boat which will go quicker on dry land than on the water,” replied hans, “and when i have finished it, i am to have the king’s daughter for my wife.” “well,”
said the little man, “such an one shall it be, and remain.” in the evening, when the sun had turned into gold, hans finished his boat, and all that was wanted for it. he got into it and rowed to the palace. the boat went as swiftly as the wind. the king saw it from afar, but would not give his daughter to hans yet, and said he must first take a hundred hares out to pasture from early morning until late evening, and if one of them got away, he should not have his daughter. hans was contented with this, and the next day went with his flock to the pasture, and took great care that none of them ran away.
before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace, and told hans that he must give her a hare instantly, for some visitors had come unexpectedly. hans, however, was very well aware what that meant, and said he would not give her one; the king might set some hare soup before his guest next day. the maid, however, would not believe in his refusal, and at last she began to get angry with him. then hans said that if the king’s daughter came herself, he would give her a hare. the maid told this in the palace, and the daughter did go herself. in the meantime, however, the little man came again to hans, and asked him what he was doing there? he said he had to watch over a hundred hares and see that none of them ran away, and then he might marry the king’s daughter and be king. “good,” said the little man, “there is a whistle for thee, and if one of them runs away, just whistle with it, and then it will come back again.” when the king’s daughter came, hans gave her a hare into her apron; but when she had gone about a hundred steps with it, he whistled, and the hare jumped out of the apron, and before she could turn round was back to the flock again. when the evening came the hare-herd whistled once more, and looked to see if all were there, and then drove them to the palace. the king wondered how hans had been able to take a hundred hares to graze without losing any of them; he would, however, not give him his daughter yet, and said he must now bring him a feather from the griffin’s tail. hans set out at once, and walked straight forwards. in the evening he came to a castle, and there he asked for a night’s lodging, for at that time there were no inns. the lord of the castle promised him that with much pleasure, and asked where he was going? hans answered, “to the griffin.” “oh! to the griffin! they tell me he knows everything, and i have lost the key of an iron money-chest; so you might be so good as to ask him where it is.” “yes, indeed,” said hans, “i will do that.” early the next morning he went onwards, and on his way arrived at another castle in which he again stayed the night. when the people who lived there learnt that he was going to the griffin, they said they had in the house a daughter who was ill, and that they had already tried every means to cure her, but none of them had done her any good, and he might be so kind as to ask the griffin what would make their daughter healthy again? hans said he would willingly do that, and went onwards. then he came to a lake, and instead of a ferry-boat, a tall, tall man was there who had to carry everybody across. the man asked hans whither he was journeying?
“to the griffin,” said hans. “then when you get to him,” said the man, “just ask him why i am forced to carry everybody over the lake.” “yes, indeed, most certainly i’ll do that,” said hans. then the man took him up on his shoulders, and carried him across. at length hans arrived at the griffin’s house, but the wife only was at home, and not the griffin himself. then the woman asked him what he wanted? thereupon he told her everything;—that he had to get a feather out of the griffin’s tail, and that there was a castle where they had lost the key of their money-chest, and he was to ask the griffin where it was?—that in another castle the daughter was ill, and he was to learn what would cure her?—and then not far from thence there was a lake and a man beside it, who was forced to carry people across it, and he was very anxious to learn why the man was obliged to do it. then said the woman, “but look here, my good friend, no christian can speak to the griffin; he devours them all; but if you like, you can lie down under his bed, and in the night, when he is quite fast asleep, you can reach out and pull a feather out of his tail, and as for those things which you are to learn, i will ask about them myself.” hans was quite satisfied with this, and got under the bed. in the evening, the griffin came home, and as soon as he entered the room, said, “wife, i smell a christian.”
“yes,” said the woman, “one was here to-day, but he went away again;”
and on that the griffin said no more.
in the middle of the night when the griffin was snoring loudly, hans reached out and plucked a feather from his tail. the griffin woke up instantly, and said, “wife, i smell a christian, and it seems to me that somebody was pulling at my tail.” his wife said, “thou hast certainly been dreaming, and i told thee before that a christian was here to-day, but that he went away again. he told me all kinds of things that in one castle they had lost the key of their money-chest, and could find it nowhere.” “oh! the fools!” said the griffin; “the key lies in the wood-house under a log of wood behind the door.” “and then he said that in another castle the daughter was ill, and they knew no remedy that would cure her.” “oh! the fools!” said the griffin; “under the cellar-steps a toad has made its nest of her hair, and if she got her hair back she would be well.” “and then he also said that there was a place where there was a lake and a man beside it who was forced to carry everybody across.” “oh, the fool!” said the griffin; “if he only put one man down in the middle, he would never have to carry another across.” early the next morning the griffin got up and went out. then hans came forth from under the bed, and he had a beautiful feather, and had heard what the griffin had said about the key, and the daughter, and the ferry-man. the griffin’s wife repeated it all once more to him that he might not forget it, and then he went home again. first he came to the man by the lake, who asked him what the griffin had said, but hans replied that he must first carry him across, and then he would tell him. so the man carried him across, and when he was over hans told him that all he had to do was to set one person down in the middle of the lake, and then he would never have to carry over any more. the man was hugely delighted, and told hans that out of gratitude he would take him once more across, and back again. but hans said no, he would save him the trouble, he was quite satisfied already, and pursued his way.
then he came to the castle where the daughter was ill; he took her on his shoulders, for she could not walk, and carried her down the cellar-steps and pulled out the toad’s nest from beneath the lowest step and gave it into her hand, and she sprang off his shoulder and up the steps before him, and was quite cured. then were the father and mother beyond measure rejoiced, and they gave hans gifts of gold and of silver, and whatsoever else he wished for, that they gave him. and when he got to the other castle he went at once into the wood-house, and found the key under the log of wood behind the door, and took it to the lord of the castle. he also was not a little pleased, and gave hans as a reward much of the gold that was in the chest, and all kinds of things besides, such as cows, and sheep, and goats. when hans arrived before the king, with all these things—with the money, and the gold, and the silver and the cows, sheep and goats, the king asked him how he had come by them. then hans told him that the griffin gave every one whatsoever he wanted. so the king thought he himself could make such things useful, and set out on his way to the griffin; but when he got to the lake, it happened that he was the very first who arrived there after hans, and the man put him down in the middle of it and went away, and the king was drowned. hans, however, married the daughter, and became king.
166 strong hans
there were once a man and a woman who had an only child, and lived quite alone in a solitary valley. it came to pass that the mother once went into the wood to gather branches of fir, and took with her little hans, who was just two years old. as it was spring-time, and the child took pleasure in the many-coloured flowers, she went still further onwards with him into the forest. suddenly two robbers sprang out of the thicket, seized the mother and child, and carried them far away into the black forest, where no one ever came from one year’s end to another. the poor woman urgently begged the robbers to set her and her child free, but their hearts were made of stone, they would not listen to her prayers and entreaties, and drove her on farther by force. after they had worked their way through bushes and briars for about two miles, they came to a rock where there was a door, at which the robbers knocked and it opened at once. they had to go through a long dark passage, and at last came into a great cavern, which was lighted by a fire which burnt on the hearth. on the wall hung swords, sabres, and other deadly weapons which gleamed in the light, and in the midst stood a black table at which four other robbers were sitting gambling, and the captain sat at the head of it. as soon as he saw the woman he came and spoke to her, and told her to be at ease and have no fear, they would do nothing to hurt her, but she must look after the house-keeping, and if she kept everything in order, she should not fare ill with them. thereupon they gave her something to eat, and showed her a bed where she might sleep with her child.
the woman stayed many years with the robbers, and hans grew tall and strong. his mother told him stories, and taught him to read an old book of tales about knights which she found in the cave. when hans was nine years old, he made himself a strong club out of a branch of fir, hid it behind the bed, and then went to his mother and said, “dear mother, pray tell me who is my father; i must and will know.” his mother was silent and would not tell him, that he might not become home-sick; moreover she knew that the godless robbers would not let him go away, but it almost broke her heart that hans should not go to his father. in the night, when the robbers came home from their robbing expedition, hans brought out his club, stood before the captain, and said, “i now wish to know who is my father, and if thou dost not at once tell me i will strike thee down.” then the captain laughed, and gave hans such a box on the ear that he rolled under the table. hans got up again, held his tongue, and thought, “i will wait another year and then try again, perhaps i shall do better then.” when the year was over, he brought out his club again, rubbed the dust off it, looked at it well, and said, “it is a stout strong club.” at night the robbers came home, drank one jug of wine after another, and their heads began to be heavy. then hans brought out his club, placed himself before the captain, and asked him who was his father? but the captain again gave him such a vigorous box on the ear that hans rolled under the table, but it was not long before he was up again, and beat the captain and the robbers so with his club, that they could no longer move either their arms or their legs. his mother stood in a corner full of admiration of his bravery and strength. when hans had done his work, he went to his mother, and said, “now i have shown myself to be in earnest, but now i must also know who is my father.” “dear hans,” answered the mother, “come, we will go and seek him until we find him.” she took from the captain the key to the entrance-door, and hans fetched a great meal-sack and packed into it gold and silver, and whatsoever else he could find that was beautiful, until it was full, and then he took it on his back. they left the cave, but how hans did open his eyes when he came out of the darkness into daylight, and saw the green forest, and the flowers, and the birds, and the morning sun in the sky. he stood there and wondered at everything just as if he had not been very wise. his mother looked for the way home, and when they had walked for a couple of hours, they got safely into their lonely valley and to their little house. the father was sitting in the doorway. he wept for joy when he recognized his wife and heard that hans was his son, for he had long regarded them both as dead. but hans, although he was not twelve years old, was a head taller than his father. they went into the little room together, but hans had scarcely put his sack on the bench by the stove, than the whole house began to crack the bench broke down and then the floor, and the heavy sack fell through into the cellar. “god save us!” cried the father, “what’s that? now thou hast broken our little house to pieces!” “don’t grow any grey hairs about that, dear father,” answered hans; “there, in that sack, is more than is wanting for a new house.” the father and hans at once began to build a new house; to buy cattle and land, and to keep a farm. hans ploughed the fields, and when he followed the plough and pushed it into the ground, the bullocks had scarcely any need to draw. the next spring, hans said, “keep all the money and get a walking-stick that weighs a hundred-weight made for me that i may go a-travelling.” when the wished-for stick was ready, he left his father’s house, went forth, and came to a deep, dark forest. there he heard something crunching and cracking, looked round, and saw a fir-tree which was wound round like a rope from the bottom to the top, and when he looked upwards he saw a great fellow who had laid hold of the tree and was twisting it like a willow-wand. “hollo!” cried hans, “what art thou doing up there?” the fellow replied, “i got some faggots together yesterday and am twisting a rope for them.” “that is what i like,” thought hans, “he has some strength,” and he called to him, “leave that alone, and come with me.” the fellow came down, and he was taller by a whole head than hans, and hans was not little. “thy name is now fir-twister,” said hans to him. thereupon they went further and heard something knocking and hammering with such force that the ground shook at every stroke. shortly afterwards they came to a mighty rock, before which a giant was standing and striking great pieces of it away with his fist. when hans asked what he was about, he answered, “at night, when i want to sleep, bears, wolves, and other vermin of that kind come, which sniff and snuffle about me and won’t let me rest; so i want to build myself a house and lay myself inside it, so that i may have some peace.” “oh, indeed,” thought hans, “i can make use of this one also;” and said to him, “leave thy house-building alone, and go with me; thou shalt be called rock-splitter.” the man consented, and they all three roamed through the forest, and wherever they went the wild beasts were terrified, and ran away from them. in the evening they came to an old deserted castle, went up into it, and laid themselves down in the hall to sleep. the next morning hans went into the garden.
it had run quite wild, and was full of thorns and bushes. and as he was thus walking round about, a wild boar rushed at him; he, however, gave it such a blow with his club that it fell directly. he took it on his shoulders and carried it in, and they put it on a spit, roasted it, and enjoyed themselves. then they arranged that each day, in turn, two should go out hunting, and one should stay at home, and cook nine pounds of meat for each of them. fir-twister stayed at home the first, and hans and rock-splitter went out hunting. when fir-twister was busy cooking, a little shrivelled-up old mannikin came to him in the castle, and asked for some meat. “be off, sly hypocrite,” he answered, “thou needest no meat.” but how astonished fir-twister was when the little insignificant dwarf sprang up at him, and belaboured him so with his fists that he could not defend himself, but fell on the ground and gasped for breath! the dwarf did not go away until he had thoroughly vented his anger on him. when the two others came home from hunting, fir-twister said nothing to them of the old mannikin and of the blows which he himself had received, and thought, “when they stay at home, they may just try their chance with the little scrubbing-brush;” and the mere thought of that gave him pleasure already.
the next day rock-splitter stayed at home, and he fared just as fir-twister had done, he was very ill-treated by the dwarf because he was not willing to give him any meat. when the others came home in the evening, fir-twister easily saw what he had suffered, but both kept silence, and thought, “hans also must taste some of that soup.”
hans, who had to stay at home the next day, did his work in the kitchen as it had to be done, and as he was standing skimming the pan, the dwarf came and without more ado demanded a bit of meat. then hans thought, “he is a poor wretch, i will give him some of my share, that the others may not run short,” and handed him a bit. when the dwarf had devoured it, he again asked for some meat, and good-natured hans gave it to him, and told him it was a handsome piece, and that he was to be content with it. but the dwarf begged again for the third time. “thou art shameless!” said hans, and gave him none. then the malicious dwarf wanted to spring on him and treat him as he had treated fir-twister and rock-splitter, but he had got to the wrong man. hans, without exerting himself much, gave him a couple of blows which made him jump down the castle steps. hans was about to run after him, but fell right over him, for he was so tall. when he rose up again, the dwarf had got the start of him. hans hurried after him as far as the forest, and saw him slip into a hole in the rock. hans now went home, but he had marked the spot. when the two others came back, they were surprised that hans was so well. he told them what had happened, and then they no longer concealed how it had fared with them. hans laughed and said, “it served you quite right; why were you so greedy with your meat? it is a disgrace that you who are so big should have let yourselves be beaten by the dwarf.” thereupon they took a basket and a rope, and all three went to the hole in the rock into which the dwarf had slipped, and let hans and his club down in the basket. when hans had reached the bottom, he found a door, and when he opened it a maiden was sitting there who was lovely as any picture, nay, so beautiful that no words can express it, and by her side sat the dwarf and grinned at hans like a sea-cat!
she, however, was bound with chains, and looked so mournfully at him that hans felt great pity for her, and thought to himself, “thou must deliver her out of the power of the wicked dwarf,” and gave him such a blow with his club that he fell down dead. immediately the chains fell from the maiden, and hans was enraptured with her beauty. she told him she was a king’s daughter whom a savage count had stolen away from her home, and imprisoned there among the rocks, because she would have nothing to say to him. the count had, however, set the dwarf as a watchman, and he had made her bear misery and vexation enough. and now hans placed the maiden in the basket and had her drawn up; the basket came down again, but hans did not trust his two companions, and thought, “they have already shown themselves to be false, and told me nothing about the dwarf; who knows what design they may have against me?” so he put his club in the basket, and it was lucky he did; for when the basket was half-way up, they let it fall again, and if hans had really been sitting in it he would have been killed. but now he did not know how he was to work his way out of the depths, and when he turned it over and over in his mind he found no counsel. “it is indeed sad,” said he to himself, “that i have to waste away down here,” and as he was thus walking backwards and forwards, he once more came to the little chamber where the maiden had been sitting, and saw that the dwarf had a ring on his finger which shone and sparkled. then he drew it off and put it on, and when he turned it round on his finger, he suddenly heard something rustle over his head. he looked up and saw spirits of the air hovering above, who told him he was their master, and asked what his desire might be? hans was at first struck dumb, but afterwards he said that they were to carry him above again. they obeyed instantly, and it was just as if he had flown up himself. when, however, he was above again, he found no one in sight. fir-twister and rock-splitter had hurried away, and had taken the beautiful maiden with them. but hans turned the ring, and the spirits of the air came and told him that the two were on the sea. hans ran and ran without stopping, until he came to the sea-shore, and there far, far out on the water, he perceived a little boat in which his faithless comrades were sitting; and in fierce anger he leapt, without thinking what he was doing, club in hand into the water, and began to swim, but the club, which weighed a hundredweight, dragged him deep down until he was all but drowned. then in the very nick of time he turned his ring, and immediately the spirits of the air came and bore him as swift as lightning into the boat. he swung his club and gave his wicked comrades the reward they merited and threw them into the water, and then he sailed with the beautiful maiden, who had been in the greatest alarm, and whom he delivered for the second time, home to her father and mother, and married her, and all rejoiced exceedingly.
167 the peasant in heaven
once on a time a poor pious peasant died, and arrived before the gate of heaven. at the same time a very rich, rich lord came there who also wanted to get into heaven. then saint peter came with the key, and opened the door, and let the great man in, but apparently did not see the peasant, and shut the door again. and now the peasant outside, heard how the great man was received in heaven with all kinds of rejoicing, and how they were making music, and singing within. at length all became quiet again, and saint peter came and opened the gate of heaven, and let the peasant in. the peasant, however, expected that they would make music and sing when he went in also, but all remained quite quiet; he was received with great affection, it is true, and the angels came to meet him, but no one sang. then the peasant asked saint peter how it was that they did not sing for him as they had done when the rich man went in, and said that it seemed to him that there in heaven things were done with just as much partiality as on earth. then said saint peter, “by no means, thou art just as dear to us as any one else, and wilt enjoy every heavenly delight that the rich man enjoys, but poor fellows like thee come to heaven every day, but a rich man like this does not come more than once in a hundred years!”
168 lean lisa
lean lisa was of a very different way of thinking from lazy harry and fat trina, who never let anything disturb their peace. she scoured everything with ashes, from morning till evening, and burdened her husband, long laurence, with so much work that he had heavier weights to carry than an ass with three sacks. it was, however, all to no purpose, they had nothing and came to nothing. one night as she lay in bed, and could hardly move one limb for weariness, she still did not allow her thoughts to go to sleep. she thrust her elbows into her husband’s side, and said, “listen, lenz, to what i have been thinking:
if i were to find one florin and one was given to me, i would borrow another to put to them, and thou too shouldst give me another, and then as soon as i had got the four florins together, i would buy a young cow.” this pleased the husband right well. “it is true,” said he, “that i do not know where i am to get the florin which thou wantest as a gift from me; but, if thou canst get the money together, and canst buy a cow with it, thou wilt do well to carry out thy project. i shall be glad,”
he added, “if the cow has a calf, and then i shall often get a drink of milk to refresh me.” “the milk is not for thee,” said the woman, “we must let the calf suck that it may become big and fat, and we may be able to sell it well.” “certainly,” replied the man, “but still we will take a little milk; that will do no harm.” “who has taught thee to manage cows?” said the woman; “whether it does harm or not, i will not allow it, and even if thou wert to stand on thy head for it, thou shouldst not have a drop of the milk! dost thou think, because there is no satisfying thee, long laurence, that thou art to eat up what i earn with so much difficulty?” “wife,” said the man, “be quiet, or i will give thee a blow on thy mouth!” “what!” cried she, “thou threatenest me, thou glutton, thou rascal, thou lazy harry!” she was just laying hold of his hair, but long laurence got up, seized both lean lisa’s withered arms in one hand, and with the other he pressed down her head into the pillow, let her scold, and held her until she fell asleep for very weariness. whether she continued to wrangle when she awoke next morning, or whether she went out to look for the florin which she wanted to find, that i know not.
169 the hut in the forest
a poor wood-cutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little hut on the edge of a lonely forest. one morning as he was about to go to his work, he said to his wife, “let my dinner be brought into the forest to me by my eldest daughter, or i shall never get my work done, and in order that she may not miss her way,” he added, “i will take a bag of millet with me and strew the seeds on the path.” when, therefore, the sun was just above the center of the forest, the girl set out on her way with a bowl of soup, but the field-sparrows, and wood-sparrows, larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked up the millet long before, and the girl could not find the track. then trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank and night began to fall. the trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and she began to be afraid. then in the distance she perceived a light which glimmered between the trees. “there ought to be some people living there, who can take me in for the night,” thought she, and went up to the light. it was not long before she came to a house the windows of which were all lighted up. she knocked, and a rough voice from inside cried, “come in.” the girl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked at the door of the room. “just come in,” cried the voice, and when she opened the door, an old gray-haired man was sitting at the table, supporting his face with both hands, and his white beard fell down over the table almost as far as the ground. by the stove lay three animals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow. the girl told her story to the old man, and begged for shelter for the night. the man said,
“pretty little hen, pretty little cock, and pretty brindled cow, what say ye to that?”
“duks,” answered the animals, and that must have meant, “we are willing,” for the old man said, “here you shall have shelter and food, go to the fire, and cook us our supper.” the girl found in the kitchen abundance of everything, and cooked a good supper, but had no thought of the animals. she carried the full dishes to the table, seated herself by the gray-haired man, ate and satisfied her hunger. when she had had enough, she said, “but now i am tired, where is there a bed in which i can lie down, and sleep?” the animals replied,
“thou hast eaten with him, thou hast drunk with him, thou hast had no thought for us, so find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night.”
then said the old man, “just go upstairs, and thou wilt find a room with two beds, shake them up, and put white linen on them, and then i, too, will come and lie down to sleep.” the girl went up, and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheets on, she lay down in one of them without waiting any longer for the old man. after some time, however, the gray-haired man came, took his candle, looked at the girl and shook his head. when he saw that she had fallen into a sound sleep, he opened a trap-door, and let her down into the cellar.
late at night the wood-cutter came home, and reproached his wife for leaving him to hunger all day. “it is not my fault,” she replied, “the girl went out with your dinner, and must have lost herself, but she is sure to come back to-morrow.” the wood-cutter, however, arose before dawn to go into the forest, and requested that the second daughter should take him his dinner that day. “i will take a bag with lentils,”
said he; “the seeds are larger than millet, the girl will see them better, and can’t lose her way.” at dinner-time, therefore, the girl took out the food, but the lentils had disappeared. the birds of the forest had picked them up as they had done the day before, and had left none. the girl wandered about in the forest until night, and then she too reached the house of the old man, was told to go in, and begged for food and a bed. the man with the white beard again asked the animals,
“pretty little hen, pretty little cock, and pretty brindled cow, what say ye to that?”
the animals again replied “duks,” and everything happened just as it had happened the day before. the girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank with the old man, and did not concern herself about the animals, and when she inquired about her bed they answered,
“thou hast eaten with him, thou hast drunk with him, thou hast had no thought for us, to find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night.”
when she was asleep the old man came, looked at her, shook his head, and let her down into the cellar.
on the third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife, “send our youngest child out with my dinner to-day, she has always been good and obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not run about after every wild humble-bee, as her sisters did.” the mother did not want to do it, and said, “am i to lose my dearest child, as well?”
“have no fear,” he replied, “the girl will not go astray; she is too prudent and sensible; besides i will take some peas with me, and strew them about. they are still larger than lentils, and will show her the way.” but when the girl went out with her basket on her arm, the wood-pigeons had already got all the peas in their crops, and she did not know which way she was to turn. she was full of sorrow and never ceased to think how hungry her father would be, and how her good mother would grieve, if she did not go home. at length when it grew dark, she saw the light and came to the house in the forest. she begged quite prettily to be allowed to spend the night there, and the man with the white beard once more asked his animals,
“pretty little hen, pretty little cock, and beautiful brindled cow, what say ye to that?”
“duks,” said they. then the girl went to the stove where the animals were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and stroked their smooth feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled cow between her horns, and when, in obedience to the old man’s orders, she had made ready some good soup, and the bowl was placed upon the table, she said, “am i to eat as much as i want, and the good animals to have nothing?
outside is food in plenty, i will look after them first.” so she went and brought some barley and stewed it for the cock and hen, and a whole armful of sweet-smelling hay for the cow. “i hope you will like it, dear animals,” said she, “and you shall have a refreshing draught in case you are thirsty.” then she fetched in a bucketful of water, and the cock and hen jumped on to the edge of it and dipped their beaks in, and then held up their heads as the birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow also took a hearty draught. when the animals were fed, the girl seated herself at the table by the old man, and ate what he had left. it was not long before the cock and the hen began to thrust their heads beneath their wings, and the eyes of the cow likewise began to blink. then said the girl, “ought we not to go to bed?”
“pretty little hen, pretty little cock, and pretty brindled cow, what say ye to that?”
the animals answered “duks,”
“thou hast eaten with us, thou hast drunk with us, thou hast had kind thought for all of us, we wish thee good-night.”
then the maiden went upstairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid clean sheets on them, and when she had done it the old man came and lay down on one of the beds, and his white beard reached down to his feet. the girl lay down on the other, said her prayers, and fell asleep.
she slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise in the house that she awoke. there was a sound of cracking and splitting in every corner, and the doors sprang open, and beat against the walls.
the beams groaned as if they were being torn out of their joints, it seemed as if the staircase were falling down, and at length there was a crash as if the entire roof had fallen in. as, however, all grew quiet once more, and the girl was not hurt, she stayed quietly lying where she was, and fell asleep again. but when she woke up in the morning with the brilliancy of the sunshine, what did her eyes behold? she was lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with royal splendor; on the walls, golden flowers grew up on a ground of green silk, the bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet, and on a chair close by, was a pair of shoes embroidered with pearls. the girl believed that she was in a dream, but three richly clad attendants came in, and asked what orders she would like to give? “if you will go,” she replied, “i will get up at once and make ready some soup for the old man, and then i will feed the pretty little hen, and the cock, and the beautiful brindled cow.” she thought the old man was up already, and looked round at his bed; he, however, was not lying in it, but a stranger. and while she was looking at him, and becoming aware that he was young and handsome, he awoke, sat up in bed, and said, “i am a king’s son, and was bewitched by a wicked witch, and made to live in this forest, as an old gray-haired man; no one was allowed to be with me but my three attendants in the form of a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow. the spell was not to be broken until a girl came to us whose heart was so good that she showed herself full of love, not only towards mankind, but towards animals—and that thou hast done, and by thee at midnight we were set free, and the old hut in the forest was changed back again into my royal palace.” and when they had arisen, the king’s son ordered the three attendants to set out and fetch the father and mother of the girl to the marriage feast. “but where are my two sisters?” inquired the maiden. “i have locked them in the cellar, and to-morrow they shall be led into the forest, and shall live as servants to a charcoal-burner, until they have grown kinder, and do not leave poor animals to suffer hunger.”
170 sharing joy and sorrow
there was once a tailor, who was a quarrelsome fellow, and his wife, who was good, industrious, and pious, never could please him. whatever she did, he was not satisfied, but grumbled and scolded, and knocked her about and beat her. as the authorities at last heard of it, they had him summoned, and put in prison in order to make him better. he was kept for a while on bread and water, and then set free again. he was forced, however, to promise not to beat his wife any more, but to live with her in peace, and share joy and sorrow with her, as married people ought to do. all went on well for a time, but then he fell into his old ways, and was surly and quarrelsome. and because he dared not beat her, he would seize her by the hair and tear it out. the woman escaped from him, and sprang out into the yard, but he ran after her with his yard-measure and scissors, and chased her about, and threw the yard-measure and scissors at her, and whatever else came his way. when he hit her he laughed, and when he missed her, he stormed and swore.
this went on so long that the neighbors came to the wife’s assistance.
the tailor was again summoned before the magistrates, and reminded of his promise. “dear gentlemen,” said he, “i have kept my word, i have not beaten her, but have shared joy and sorrow with her.” “how can that be,” said the judge, “when she continually brings such heavy complaints against you?” “i have not beaten her, but just because she looked so strange i wanted to comb her hair with my hand; she, however, got away from me, and left me quite spitefully. then i hurried after her, and in order to bring her back to her duty, i threw at her as a well-meant admonition whatever came readily to hand. i have shared joy and sorrow with her also, for whenever i hit her i was full of joy, and she of sorrow, and if i missed her, then she was joyful, and i sorry.” the judges were not satisfied with this answer, but gave him the reward he deserved.
171 the willow-wren
in former days every sound still had its meaning and application. when the smith’s hammer resounded, it cried, “strike away! strike away.”
when the carpenter’s plane grated, it said, “here goes! here goes.” if the mill wheel began to clack, it said, “help, lord god! help, lord god!” and if the miller was a cheat and happened to leave the mill, it spoke high german, and first asked slowly, “who is there? who is there?” and then answered quickly, “the miller! the miller!” and at last quite in a hurry, “he steals bravely! he steals bravely! three pecks in a bushel.”
at this time the birds also had their own language which every one understood; now it only sounds like chirping, screeching, and whistling, and to some like music without words. it came into the bird’s mind, however, that they would no longer be without a ruler, and would choose one of themselves to be their king. one alone amongst them, the green plover, was opposed to this. he had lived free, and would die free, and anxiously flying hither and thither, he cried, “where shall i go? where shall i go?” he retired into a solitary and unfrequented marsh, and showed himself no more among his fellows.
the birds now wished to discuss the matter, and on a fine may morning they all gathered together from the woods and fields: eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, how can i name them all? even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, his clerk, who is so called because he is always heard a few days before him, and a very small bird which as yet had no name, mingled with the band. the hen, which by some accident had heard nothing of the whole matter, was astonished at the great assemblage. “what, what, what is going to be done?” she cackled; but the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said, “only rich people,” and told her what they had on hand. it was decided, however, that the one who could fly the highest should be king. a tree-frog which was sitting among the bushes, when he heard that, cried a warning, “no, no, no!
no!” because he thought that many tears would be shed because of this; but the crow said, “caw, caw,” and that all would pass off peaceably.
it was now determined that on this fine morning they should at once begin to ascend, so that hereafter no one should be able to say, “i could easily have flown much higher, but the evening came on, and i could do no more.” on a given signal, therefore, the whole troop rose up in the air. the dust ascended from the land, and there was tremendous fluttering and whirring and beating of wings, and it looked as if a black cloud was rising up. the little birds were, however, soon left behind. they could go no farther, and fell back to the ground. the larger birds held out longer, but none could equal the eagle, who mounted so high that he could have picked the eyes out of the sun. and when he saw that the others could not get up to him, he thought, “why shouldst thou fly still higher, thou art the king?” and began to let himself down again. the birds beneath him at once cried to him. “thou must be our king, no one has flown so high as thou.” “except me,”
screamed the little fellow without a name, who had crept into the breast-feathers of the eagle. and as he was not at all tired, he rose up and mounted so high that he reached heaven itself. when, however, he had gone as far as this, he folded his wings together, and called down with clear and penetrating voice, “i am king! i am king.”
“thou, our king?” cried the birds angrily. “thou hast compassed it by trick and cunning!” so they made another condition. he should be king who could go down lowest in the ground. how the goose did flap about with its broad breast when it was once more on the land! how quickly the cock scratched a hole! the duck came off the worst of all, for she leapt into a ditch, but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a neighboring pond, crying, “cheating, cheating!” the little bird without a name, however, sought out a mouse-hole, slipped down into it, and cried out of it with his small voice, “i am king! i am king!”
“thou our king!” cried the birds still more angrily. “dost thou think thy cunning shall prevail?” they determined to keep him a prisoner in the hole and starve him out. the owl was placed as sentinel in front of it, and was not to let the rascal out if she had any value for her life. when evening was come all the birds were feeling very tired after exerting their wings so much, so they went to bed with their wives and children. the owl alone remained standing by the mouse-hole, gazing steadfastly into it with her great eyes. in the meantime she, too, had grown tired and thought to herself, “you might certainly shut one eye, you will still watch with the other, and the little miscreant shall not come out of his hole.” so she shut one eye, and with the other looked straight at the mouse-hole. the little fellow put his head out and peeped, and wanted to slip away, but the owl came forward immediately, and he drew his head back again. then the owl opened the one eye again, and shut the other, intending to shut them in turn all through the night.
but when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to open the other, and as soon as both her eyes were shut she fell asleep. the little fellow soon observed that, and slipped away.
from that day forth, the owl has never dared to show herself by daylight, for if she does the other birds chase her and pluck her feathers out. she only flies out by night, but hates and pursues mice because they make such ugly holes. the little bird, too, is very unwilling to let himself be seen, because he is afraid it will cost him his life if he is caught. he steals about in the hedges, and when he is quite safe, he sometimes cries, “i am king,” and for this reason, the other birds call him in mockery, ‘king of the hedges’ (zaunkönig). no one, however, was so happy as the lark at not having to obey the little king. as soon as the sun appears, she ascends high in the air and cries, “ah, how beautiful that is! beautiful that is! beautiful, beautiful! ah, how beautiful that is!”
172 the sole
the fishes had for a long time been discontented because no order prevailed in their kingdom. none of them turned aside for the others, but all swam to the right or the left as they fancied, or darted between those who wanted to stay together, or got into their way; and a strong one gave a weak one a blow with its tail, which drove it away, or else swallowed it up without more ado. “how delightful it would be,”
said they, “if we had a king who enforced law and justice among us!”
and they met together to choose for their ruler, the one who could cleave through the water most quickly, and give help to the weak ones.
they placed themselves in rank and file by the shore, and the pike gave the signal with his tail, on which they all started. like an arrow, the pike darted away, and with him the herring, the gudgeon, the perch, the carp, and all the rest of them. even the sole swam with them, and hoped to reach the winning-place. all at once, the cry was heard, “the herring is first!” “who is first?” screamed angrily the flat envious sole, who had been left far behind, “who is first?” “the herring! the herring,” was the answer. “the naked herring?” cried the jealous creature, “the naked herring?” since that time the sole’s mouth has been at one side for a punishment.
173 the bittern and the hoopoe
“where do you like best to feed your flocks?” said a man to an old cow-herd. “here, sir, where the grass is neither too rich nor too poor, or else it is no use.” “why not?” asked the man. “do you hear that melancholy cry from the meadow there?” answered the shepherd, “that is the bittern; he was once a shepherd, and so was the hoopoe also,—i will tell you the story. the bittern pastured his flocks on rich green meadows where flowers grew in abundance, so his cows became wild and unmanageable. the hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren hills, where the wind plays with the sand, and his cows became thin, and got no strength. when it was evening, and the shepherds wanted to drive their cows homewards, the bittern could not get his together again; they were too high-spirited, and ran away from him. he called, “come, cows, come,” but it was of no use; they took no notice of his calling.
the hoopoe, however, could not even get his cows up on their legs, so faint and weak had they become. “up, up, up,” screamed he, but it was in vain, they remained lying on the sand. that is the way when one has no moderation. and to this day, though they have no flocks now to watch, the bittern cries, “come, cows, come,” and the hoopoe, “up, up, up.”
174 the owl
two or three hundred years ago, when people were far from being so crafty and cunning as they are now-a-day, an extraordinary event took place in a little town. by some mischance one of the great owls, called horned owls, had come from the neighboring woods into the barn of one of the townsfolk in the night-time, and when day broke did not dare to venture forth again from her retreat, for fear of the other birds, which raised a terrible outcry whenever she appeared. in the morning when the man-servant went into the barn to fetch some straw, he was so mightily alarmed at the sight of the owl sitting there in a corner, that he ran away and announced to his master that a monster, the like of which he had never set eyes on in his life, and which could devour a man without the slightest difficulty, was sitting in the barn, rolling its eyes about in its head. “i know you already,” said the master, “you have courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields, but when you see a dead hen lying, you have to get a stick before you go near it. i must go and see for myself what kind of a monster it is,” added the master, and went quite boldly into the granary and looked round him.
when, however, he saw the strange grim creature with his own eyes, he was no less terrified than the servant had been. with two bounds he sprang out, ran to his neighbours, and begged them imploringly to lend him assistance against an unknown and dangerous beast, or else the whole town might be in danger if it were to break loose out of the barn, where it was shut up. a great noise and clamour arose in all the streets, the townsmen came armed with spears, hay-forks, scythes, and axes, as if they were going out against an enemy; finally, the senators appeared with the burgomaster at their head. when they had drawn up in the market-place, they marched to the barn, and surrounded it on all sides. thereupon one of the most courageous of them stepped forth and entered with his spear lowered, but came running out immediately afterwards with a shriek and as pale as death, and could not utter a single word. yet two others ventured in, but they fared no better. at last one stepped forth; a great strong man who was famous for his warlike deeds, and said, “you will not drive away the monster by merely looking at him; we must be in earnest here, but i see that you have all tuned into women, and not one of you dares to encounter the animal.” he ordered them to give him some armour, had a sword and spear brought, and armed himself. all praised his courage, though many feared for his life. the two barn-doors were opened, and they saw the owl, which in the meantime had perched herself on the middle of a great cross-beam.
he had a ladder brought, and when he raised it, and made ready to climb up, they all cried out to him that he was to bear himself bravely, and commended him to st. george, who slew the dragon. when he had just got to the top, and the owl perceived that he had designs on her, and was also bewildered by the crowd and the shouting, and knew not how to escape, she rolled her eyes, ruffled her feathers, flapped her wings, snapped her beak, and cried, “tuwhit, tuwhoo,” in a harsh voice.
“strike home! strike home!” screamed the crowd outside to the valiant hero. “any one who was standing where i am standing,” answered he, “would not cry, strike home!” he certainly did plant his foot one rung higher on the ladder, but then he began to tremble, and half-fainting, went back again.
and now there was no one left who dared to put himself in such danger.
“the monster,” said they, “has poisoned and mortally wounded the very strongest man among us, by snapping at him and just breathing on him!
are we, too, to risk our lives?” they took counsel as to what they ought to do to prevent the whole town being destroyed. for a long time everything seemed to be of no use, but at length the burgomaster found an expedient. “my opinion,” said he, “is that we ought, out of the common purse, to pay for this barn, and whatsoever corn, straw, or hay it contains, and thus indemnify the owner, and then burn down the whole building, and the terrible beast with it. thus no one will have to endanger his life. this is no time for thinking of expense, and niggardliness would be ill applied.” all agreed with him. so they set fire to the barn at all four corners, and with it the owl was miserably burnt. let any one who will not believe it, go thither and inquire for himself.
175 the moon
in days gone by there was a land where the nights were always dark, and the sky spread over it like a black cloth, for there the moon never rose, and no star shone in the obscurity. at the creation of the world, the light at night had been sufficient. three young fellows once went out of this country on a travelling expedition, and arrived in another kingdom, where, in the evening when the sun had disappeared behind the mountains, a shining globe was placed on an oak-tree, which shed a soft light far and wide. by means of this, everything could very well be seen and distinguished, even though it was not so brilliant as the sun.
the travellers stopped and asked a countryman who was driving past with his cart, what kind of a light that was. “that is the moon,” answered he; “our mayor bought it for three thalers, and fastened it to the oak-tree. he has to pour oil into it daily, and to keep it clean, so that it may always burn clearly. he receives a thaler a week from us for doing it.”
when the countryman had driven away, one of them said, “we could make some use of this lamp, we have an oak-tree at home, which is just as big as this, and we could hang it on that. what a pleasure it would be not to have to feel about at night in the darkness!” “i’ll tell you what we’ll do,” said the second; “we will fetch a cart and horses and carry away the moon. the people here may buy themselves another.” “i’m a good climber,” said the third, “i will bring it down.” the fourth brought a cart and horses, and the third climbed the tree, bored a hole in the moon, passed a rope through it, and let it down. when the shining ball lay in the cart, they covered it over with a cloth, that no one might observe the theft. they conveyed it safely into their own country, and placed it on a high oak. old and young rejoiced, when the new lamp let its light shine over the whole land, and bed-rooms and sitting-rooms were filled with it. the dwarfs came forth from their caves in the rocks, and the tiny elves in their little red coats danced in rings on the meadows.
the four took care that the moon was provided with oil, cleaned the wick, and received their weekly thaler, but they became old men, and when one of them grew ill, and saw that he was about to die, he appointed that one quarter of the moon, should, as his property, be laid in the grave with him. when he died, the mayor climbed up the tree, and cut off a quarter with the hedge-shears, and this was placed in his coffin. the light of the moon decreased, but still not visibly.
when the second died, the second quarter was buried with him, and the light diminished. it grew weaker still after the death of the third, who likewise took his part of it away with him; and when the fourth was borne to his grave, the old state of darkness recommenced, and whenever the people went out at night without their lanterns they knocked their heads together.
when, however, the pieces of the moon had united themselves together again in the world below, where darkness had always prevailed, it came to pass that the dead became restless and awoke from their sleep. they were astonished when they were able to see again; the moonlight was quite sufficient for them, for their eyes had become so weak that they could not have borne the brilliance of the sun. they rose up and were merry, and fell into their former ways of living. some of them went to the play and to dance, others hastened to the public-houses, where they asked for wine, got drunk, brawled, quarreled, and at last took up cudgels, and belabored each other. the noise became greater and greater, and at last reached even to heaven.
saint peter who guards the gate of heaven thought the lower world had broken out in revolt and gathered together the heavenly troops, which are to drive back the evil one when he and his associates storm the abode of the blessed. as these, however, did not come, he got on his horse and rode through the gate of heaven, down into the world below.
there he reduced the dead to subjection, bade them lie down in their graves again, took the moon away with him, and hung it up in heaven.
176 the duration of life
when god had created the world and was about to fix the length of each creature’s life, the ass came and asked, “lord, how long shall i live?”
“thirty years,” replied god; “does that content thee?” “ah, lord,”
answered the ass, “that is a long time. think of my painful existence!
to carry heavy burdens from morning to night, to drag sacks of corn to the mill, that others may eat bread, to be cheered and refreshed with nothing but blows and kicks. relieve me of a portion of this long time.” then god had pity on him and relieved him of eighteen years. the ass went away comforted, and the dog appeared. “how long wouldst thou like to live?” said god to him. “thirty years are too many for the ass, but thou wilt be satisfied with that.” “lord,” answered the dog, “is that thy will? consider how i shall have to run, my feet will never hold out so long, and when i have once lost my voice for barking, and my teeth for biting, what will be left for me to do but run from one corner to another and growl?” god saw that he was right, and released him from twelve years of life. then came the monkey. “thou wilt certainly live thirty years willingly?” said the lord to him. “thou hast no need to work as the ass and the dog have to do, and wilt always enjoy thyself.” “ah! lord,” he answered, “it may seem as if that were the case, but it is quite different. when it rains porridge i have no spoon. i am always to play merry pranks, and make faces which force people to laugh, and if they give me an apple, and i bite into it, why it is sour! how often sadness hides itself behind mirth! i shall never be able to hold out for thirty years.” god was gracious and took off ten.
at last man appeared, joyous, healthy and vigorous, and begged god to appoint his time for him. “thirty years shalt thou live,” said the lord. “is that enough for thee?” “what a short time,” cried man, “when i have built my house and my fire burns on my own hearth; when i have planted trees which blossom and bear fruit, and am just intending to enjoy my life, i am to die! o lord, lengthen my time.” “i will add to it the ass’s eighteen years,” said god. “that is not enough,” replied the man. “thou shalt also have the dog’s twelve years.” “still too little!” “well, then,” said god, “i will give thee the monkey’s ten years also, but more thou shalt not have.” the man went away, but was not satisfied.
so man lives seventy years. the first thirty are his human years, which are soon gone; then is he healthy, merry, works with pleasure, and is glad of his life. then follow the ass’s eighteen years, when one burden after another is laid on him, he has to carry the corn which feeds others, and blows and kicks are the reward of his faithful services.
then come the dog’s twelve years, when he lies in the corner, and growls and has no longer any teeth to bite with, and when this time is over the monkey’s ten years form the end. then man is weak-headed and foolish, does silly things, and becomes the jest of the children.
177 death’s messengers
in ancient times a giant was once travelling on a great highway, when suddenly an unknown man sprang up before him, and said, “halt, not one step farther!” “what!” cried the giant, “a creature whom i can crush between my fingers, wants to block my way? who art thou that thou darest to speak so boldly?” “i am death,” answered the other. “no one resists me, and thou also must obey my commands.” but the giant refused, and began to struggle with death. it was a long, violent battle, at last the giant got the upper hand, and struck death down with his fist, so that he dropped by a stone. the giant went his way, and death lay there conquered, and so weak that he could not get up again. “what will be done now,” said he, “if i stay lying here in a corner? no one will die in the world, and it will get so full of people that they won’t have room to stand beside each other.” in the meantime a young man came along the road, who was strong and healthy, singing a song, and glancing around on every side. when he saw the half-fainting one, he went compassionately to him, raised him up, poured a strengthening draught out of his flask for him, and waited till he came round. “dost thou know,” said the stranger, whilst he was getting up, “who i am, and who it is whom thou hast helped on his legs again?”
“no,” answered the youth, “i do not know thee.” “i am death,” said he.
“i spare no one, and can make no exception with thee, but that thou mayst see that i am grateful, i promise thee that i will not fall on thee unexpectedly, but will send my messengers to thee before i come and take thee away.” “well,” said the youth, “it is something gained that i shall know when thou comest, and at any rate be safe from thee for so long.” then he went on his way, and was light-hearted, and enjoyed himself, and lived without thought. but youth and health did not last long, soon came sicknesses and sorrows, which tormented him by day, and took away his rest by night. “die, i shall not,” said he to himself, “for death will send his messengers before that, but i do wish these wretched days of sickness were over.” as soon as he felt himself well again he began once more to live merrily. then one day some one tapped him on the shoulder. he looked round, and death stood behind him, and said, “follow me, the hour of thy departure from this world has come.” “what,” replied the man, “wilt thou break thy word? didst thou not promise me that thou wouldst send thy messengers to me before coming thyself? i have seen none!” “silence!” answered death. “have i not sent one messenger to thee after another? did not fever come and smite thee, and shake thee, and cast thee down? has dizziness not bewildered thy head? has not gout twitched thee in all thy limbs? did not thine ears sing? did not tooth-ache bite into thy cheeks? was it not dark before thine eyes? and besides all that, has not my own brother sleep reminded thee every night of me? didst thou not lie by night as if thou wert already dead? the man could make no answer; he yielded to his fate, and went away with death.
178 master pfriem (master cobbler’s awl)
master pfriem was a short, thin, but lively man, who never rested a moment. his face, of which his turned-up nose was the only prominent feature, was marked with small-pox and pale as death, his hair was gray and shaggy, his eyes small, but they glanced perpetually about on all sides. he saw everything, criticised everything, knew everything best, and was always in the right. when he went into the streets, he moved his arms about as if he were rowing; and once he struck the pail of a girl, who was carrying water, so high in the air that he himself was wetted all over by it. “stupid thing,” cried he to her, while he was shaking himself, “couldst thou not see that i was coming behind thee?”
by trade he was a shoemaker, and when he worked he pulled his thread out with such force that he drove his fist into every one who did not keep far enough off. no apprentice stayed more than a month with him, for he had always some fault to find with the very best work. at one time it was that the stitches were not even, at another that one shoe was too long, or one heel higher than the other, or the leather not cut large enough. “wait,” said he to his apprentice, “i will soon show thee how we make skins soft,” and he brought a strap and gave him a couple of strokes across the back. he called them all sluggards. he himself did not turn much work out of his hands, for he never sat still for a quarter of an hour. if his wife got up very early in the morning and lighted the fire, he jumped out of bed, and ran bare-footed into the kitchen, crying, “wilt thou burn my house down for me? that is a fire one could roast an ox by! does wood cost nothing?” if the servants were standing by their wash-tubs and laughing, and telling each other all they knew, he scolded them, and said, “there stand the geese cackling, and forgetting their work, to gossip! and why fresh soap? disgraceful extravagance and shameful idleness into the bargain! they want to save their hands, and not rub the things properly!” and out he would run and knock a pail full of soap and water over, so that the whole kitchen was flooded. someone was building a new house, so he hurried to the window to look on. “there, they are using that red sand-stone again that never dries!” cried he. “no one will ever be healthy in that house! and just look how badly the fellows are laying the stones! besides, the mortar is good for nothing! it ought to have gravel in it, not sand. i shall live to see that house tumble down on the people who are in it.” he sat down, put a couple of stitches in, and then jumped up again, unfastened his leather-apron, and cried, “i will just go out, and appeal to those men’s consciences.” he stumbled on the carpenters. “what’s this?” cried he, “you are not working by the line! do you expect the beams to be straight?—one wrong will put all wrong.” he snatched an axe out of a carpenter’s hand and wanted to show him how he ought to cut; but as a cart loaded with clay came by, he threw the axe away, and hastened to the peasant who was walking by the side of it: “you are not in your right mind,” said he, “who yokes young horses to a heavily-laden cart?
the poor beasts will die on the spot.” the peasant did not give him an answer, and pfriem in a rage ran back into his workshop. when he was setting himself to work again, the apprentice reached him a shoe.
“well, what’s that again?” screamed he, “haven’t i told you you ought not to cut shoes so broad? who would buy a shoe like this, which is hardly anything else but a sole? i insist on my orders being followed exactly.” “master,” answered the apprentice, “you may easily be quite right about the shoe being a bad one, but it is the one which you yourself cut out, and yourself set to work at. when you jumped up a while since, you knocked it off the table, and i have only just picked it up. an angel from heaven, however, would never make you believe that.”
one night master pfriem dreamed he was dead, and on his way to heaven.
when he got there, he knocked loudly at the door. “i wonder,” said he to himself, “that they have no knocker on the door,—one knocks one’s knuckles sore.” the apostle peter opened the door, and wanted to see who demanded admission so noisily. “ah, it’s you, master pfriem;” said he, “well, i’ll let you in, but i warn you that you must give up that habit of yours, and find fault with nothing you see in heaven, or you may fare ill.” “you might have spared your warning,” answered pfriem.
“i know already what is seemly, and here, god be thanked, everything is perfect, and there is nothing to blame as there is on earth.” so he went in, and walked up and down the wide expanses of heaven. he looked around him, to the left and to the right, but sometimes shook his head, or muttered something to himself. then he saw two angels who were carrying away a beam. it was the beam which some one had had in his own eye whilst he was looking for the splinter in the eye of another. they did not, however, carry the beam lengthways, but obliquely. “did any one ever see such a piece of stupidity?” thought master pfriem; but he said nothing, and seemed satisfied with it. “it comes to the same thing after all, whichever way they carry the beam, straight or crooked, if they only get along with it, and truly i do not see them knock against anything.” soon after this he saw two angels who were drawing water out of a well into a bucket, but at the same time he observed that the bucket was full of holes, and that the water was running out of it on every side. they were watering the earth with rain. “hang it,” he exclaimed; but happily recollected himself, and thought, “perhaps it is only a pastime. if it is an amusement, then it seems they can do useless things of this kind even here in heaven, where people, as i have already noticed, do nothing but idle about.” he went farther and saw a cart which had stuck fast in a deep hole. “it’s no wonder,” said he to the man who stood by it; “who would load so unreasonably? what have you there?” “good wishes,” replied the man, “i could not go along the right way with it, but still i have pushed it safely up here, and they won’t leave me sticking here.” in fact an angel did come and harnessed two horses to it. “that’s quite right,” thought pfriem, “but two horses won’t get that cart out, it must at least have four to it.”
another angel came and brought two more horses; she did not, however, harness them in front of it, but behind. that was too much for master pfriem, “clumsy creature,” he burst out with, “what are you doing there? has any one ever since the world began seen a cart drawn in that way? but you, in your conceited arrogance, think that you know everything best.” he was going to say more, but one of the inhabitants of heaven seized him by the throat and pushed him forth with irresistible strength. beneath the gateway master pfriem turned his head round to take one more look at the cart, and saw that it was being raised into the air by four winged horses.
at this moment master pfriem awoke. “things are certainly arranged in heaven otherwise than they are on earth,” said he to himself, “and that excuses much; but who can see horses harnessed both behind and before with patience; to be sure they had wings, but who could know that? it is, besides, great folly to fix a pair of wings to a horse that has four legs to run with already! but i must get up, or else they will make nothing but mistakes for me in my house. it is a lucky thing for me though, that i am not really dead.”
179 the goose-girl at the well
there was once upon a time a very old woman, who lived with her flock of geese in a waste place among the mountains, and there had a little house. the waste was surrounded by a large forest, and every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbled into it. there, however, the dame was quite active, more so than any one would have thought, considering her age, and collected grass for her geese, picked all the wild fruit she could reach, and carried everything home on her back.
any one would have thought that the heavy load would have weighed her to the ground, but she always brought it safely home. if any one met her, she greeted him quite courteously. “good day, dear countryman, it is a fine day. ah! you wonder that i should drag grass about, but every one must take his burthen on his back.” nevertheless, people did not like to meet her if they could help it, and took by preference a round-about way, and when a father with his boys passed her, he whispered to them, “beware of the old woman. she has claws beneath her gloves; she is a witch.” one morning, a handsome young man was going through the forest. the sun shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze crept through the leaves, and he was full of joy and gladness. he had as yet met no one, when he suddenly perceived the old witch kneeling on the ground cutting grass with a sickle. she had already thrust a whole load into her cloth, and near it stood two baskets, which were filled with wild apples and pears. “but, good little mother,” said he, “how canst thou carry all that away?” “i must carry it, dear sir,” answered she, “rich folk’s children have no need to do such things, but with the peasant folk the saying goes, don’t look behind you, you will only see how crooked your back is!”
“will you help me?” she said, as he remained standing by her. “you have still a straight back and young legs, it would be a trifle to you.
besides, my house is not so very far from here, it stands there on the heath behind the hill. how soon you would bound up thither.” the young man took compassion on the old woman. “my father is certainly no peasant,” replied he, “but a rich count; nevertheless, that you may see that it is not only peasants who can carry things, i will take your bundle.” “if you will try it,” said she, “i shall be very glad. you will certainly have to walk for an hour, but what will that signify to you; only you must carry the apples and pears as well?” it now seemed to the young man just a little serious, when he heard of an hour’s walk, but the old woman would not let him off, packed the bundle on his back, and hung the two baskets on his arm. “see, it is quite light,”
said she. “no, it is not light,” answered the count, and pulled a rueful face. “verily, the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full of cobble stones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead! i can scarcely breathe.” he had a mind to put everything down again, but the old woman would not allow it. “just look,” said she mockingly, “the young gentleman will not carry what i, an old woman, have so often dragged along. you are ready with fine words, but when it comes to be earnest, you want to take to your heels. why are you standing loitering there?” she continued. “step out. no one will take the bundle off again.” as long as he walked on level ground, it was still bearable, but when they came to the hill and had to climb, and the stones rolled down under his feet as if they were alive, it was beyond his strength.
the drops of perspiration stood on his forehead, and ran, hot and cold, down his back. “dame,” said he, “i can go no farther. i want to rest a little.” “not here,” answered the old woman, “when we have arrived at our journey’s end, you can rest; but now you must go forward. who knows what good it may do you?” “old woman, thou art becoming shameless!”
said the count, and tried to throw off the bundle, but he laboured in vain; it stuck as fast to his back as if it grew there. he turned and twisted, but he could not get rid of it. the old woman laughed at this, and sprang about quite delighted on her crutch. “don’t get angry, dear sir,” said she, “you are growing as red in the face as a turkey-cock!
carry your bundle patiently. i will give you a good present when we get home.”
what could he do? he was obliged to submit to his fate, and crawl along patiently behind the old woman. she seemed to grow more and more nimble, and his burden still heavier. all at once she made a spring, jumped on to the bundle and seated herself on the top of it; and however withered she might be, she was yet heavier than the stoutest country lass. the youth’s knees trembled, but when he did not go on, the old woman hit him about the legs with a switch and with stinging-nettles. groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at length reached the old woman’s house, when he was just about to drop.
when the geese perceived the old woman, they flapped their wings, stretched out their necks, ran to meet her, cackling all the while.
behind the flock walked, stick in hand, an old wench, strong and big, but ugly as night. “good mother,” said she to the old woman, “has anything happened to you, you have stayed away so long?” “by no means, my dear daughter,” answered she, “i have met with nothing bad, but, on the contrary, with this kind gentleman, who has carried my burthen for me; only think, he even took me on his back when i was tired. the way, too, has not seemed long to us; we have been merry, and have been cracking jokes with each other all the time.” at last the old woman slid down, took the bundle off the young man’s back, and the baskets from his arm, looked at him quite kindly, and said, “now seat yourself on the bench before the door, and rest. you have fairly earned your wages, and they shall not be wanting.” then she said to the goose-girl, “go into the house, my dear daughter, it is not becoming for thee to be alone with a young gentleman; one must not pour oil on to the fire, he might fall in love with thee.” the count knew not whether to laugh or to cry. “such a sweetheart as that,” thought he, “could not touch my heart, even if she were thirty years younger.” in the meantime the old woman stroked and fondled her geese as if they were children, and then went into the house with her daughter. the youth lay down on the bench, under a wild apple-tree. the air was warm and mild; on all sides stretched a green meadow, which was set with cowslips, wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers; through the midst of it rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled, and the white geese went walking backwards and forwards, or paddled in the water. “it is quite delightful here,”
said he, “but i am so tired that i cannot keep my eyes open; i will sleep a little. if only a gust of wind does not come and blow my legs off my body, for they are as rotten as tinder.”
when he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shook him till he awoke. “sit up,” said she, “thou canst not stay here; i have certainly treated thee hardly, still it has not cost thee thy life. of money and land thou hast no need, here is something else for thee.”
thereupon she thrust a little book into his hand, which was cut out of a single emerald. “take great care of it,” said she, “it will bring thee good fortune.” the count sprang up, and as he felt that he was quite fresh, and had recovered his vigor, he thanked the old woman for her present, and set off without even once looking back at the beautiful daughter. when he was already some way off, he still heard in the distance the noisy cry of the geese.
for three days the count had to wander in the wilderness before he could find his way out. he then reached a large town, and as no one knew him, he was led into the royal palace, where the king and queen were sitting on their throne. the count fell on one knee, drew the emerald book out of his pocket, and laid it at the queen’s feet. she bade him rise and hand her the little book. hardly, however, had she opened it, and looked therein, than she fell as if dead to the ground.
the count was seized by the king’s servants, and was being led to prison, when the queen opened her eyes, and ordered them to release him, and every one was to go out, as she wished to speak with him in private.
when the queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said, “of what use to me are the splendours and honours with which i am surrounded; every morning i awake in pain and sorrow. i had three daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that the whole world looked on her as a wonder. she was as white as snow, as rosy as apple-blossom, and her hair as radiant as sun-beams. when she cried, not tears fell from her eyes, but pearls and jewels only. when she was fifteen years old, the king summoned all three sisters to come before his throne. you should have seen how all the people gazed when the youngest entered, it was just as if the sun were rising! then the king spoke, “my daughters, i know not when my last day may arrive; i will to-day decide what each shall receive at my death. you all love me, but the one of you who loves me best, shall fare the best.” each of them said she loved him best. “can you not express to me,” said the king, “how much you do love me, and thus i shall see what you mean?” the eldest spoke. “i love my father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.” the second, “i love my father as dearly as my prettiest dress.” but the youngest was silent. then the father said, “and thou, my dearest child, how much dost thou love me?” “i do not know, and can compare my love with nothing.” but her father insisted that she should name something.
so she said at last, “the best food does not please me without salt, therefore i love my father like salt.” when the king heard that, he fell into a passion, and said, “if thou lovest me like salt, thy love shall also be repaid thee with salt.” then he divided the kingdom between the two elder, but caused a sack of salt to be bound on the back of the youngest, and two servants had to lead her forth into the wild forest. we all begged and prayed for her, said the queen, “but the king’s anger was not to be appeased. how she cried when she had to leave us! the whole road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes. the king soon afterwards repented of his great severity, and had the whole forest searched for the poor child, but no one could find her. when i think that the wild beasts have devoured her, i know not how to contain myself for sorrow; many a time i console myself with the hope that she is still alive, and may have hidden herself in a cave, or has found shelter with compassionate people. but picture to yourself, when i opened your little emerald book, a pearl lay therein, of exactly the same kind as those which used to fall from my daughter’s eyes; and then you can also imagine how the sight of it stirred my heart. you must tell me how you came by that pearl.” the count told her that he had received it from the old woman in the forest, who had appeared very strange to him, and must be a witch, but he had neither seen nor hear anything of the queen’s child. the king and the queen resolved to seek out the old woman. they thought that there where the pearl had been, they would obtain news of their daughter.
the old woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning-wheel, spinning. it was already dusk, and a log which was burning on the hearth gave a scanty light. all at once there was a noise outside, the geese were coming home from the pasture, and uttering their hoarse cries. soon afterwards the daughter also entered. but the old woman scarcely thanked her, and only shook her head a little. the daughter sat down beside her, took her spinning-wheel, and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl. thus they both sat for two hours, and exchanged never a word. at last something rustled at the window, and two fiery eyes peered in. it was an old night-owl, which cried, “uhu!”
three times. the old woman looked up just a little, then she said, “now, my little daughter, it is time for thee to go out and do thy work.” she rose and went out, and where did she go? over the meadows ever onward into the valley. at last she came to a well, with three old oak-trees standing beside it; meanwhile the moon had risen large and round over the mountain, and it was so light that one could have found a needle. she removed a skin which covered her face, then bent down to the well, and began to wash herself. when she had finished, she dipped the skin also in the water, and then laid it on the meadow, so that it should bleach in the moonlight, and dry again. but how the maiden was changed! such a change as that was never seen before! when the gray mask fell off, her golden hair broke forth like sunbeams, and spread about like a mantle over her whole form. her eyes shone out as brightly as the stars in heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a soft red like apple-blossom.
but the fair maiden was sad. she sat down and wept bitterly. one tear after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolled through her long hair to the ground. there she sat, and would have remained sitting a long time, if there had not been a rustling and cracking in the boughs of the neighbouring tree. she sprang up like a roe which has been overtaken by the shot of the hunter. just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instant the maiden had put on the old skin and vanished, like a light blown out by the wind.
she ran back home, trembling like an aspen-leaf. the old woman was standing on the threshold, and the girl was about to relate what had befallen her, but the old woman laughed kindly, and said, “i already know all.” she led her into the room and lighted a new log. she did not, however, sit down to her spinning again, but fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour, “all must be clean and sweet,” she said to the girl. “but, mother,” said the maiden, “why do you begin work at so late an hour? what do you expect?” “dost thou know then what time it is?” asked the old woman. “not yet midnight,” answered the maiden, “but already past eleven o’clock.” “dost thou not remember,” continued the old woman, “that it is three years to-day since thou camest to me? thy time is up, we can no longer remain together.” the girl was terrified, and said, “alas! dear mother, will you cast me off? where shall i go? i have no friends, and no home to which i can go. i have always done as you bade me, and you have always been satisfied with me; do not send me away.” the old woman would not tell the maiden what lay before her. “my stay here is over,” she said to her, “but when i depart, house and parlour must be clean: therefore do not hinder me in my work. have no care for thyself, thou shalt find a roof to shelter thee, and the wages which i will give thee shall also content thee.” “but tell me what is about to happen,” the maiden continued to entreat. “i tell thee again, do not hinder me in my work. do not say a word more, go to thy chamber, take the skin off thy face, and put on the silken gown which thou hadst on when thou camest to me, and then wait in thy chamber until i call thee.”
but i must once more tell of the king and queen, who had journeyed forth with the count in order to seek out the old woman in the wilderness. the count had strayed away from them in the wood by night, and had to walk onwards alone. next day it seemed to him that he was on the right track. he still went forward, until darkness came on, then he climbed a tree, intending to pass the night there, for he feared that he might lose his way. when the moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived a figure coming down the mountain. she had no stick in her hand, but yet he could see that it was the goose-girl, whom he had seen before in the house of the old woman. “oho,” cried he, “there she comes, and if i once get hold of one of the witches, the other shall not escape me!” but how astonished he was, when she went to the well, took off the skin and washed herself, when her golden hair fell down all about her, and she was more beautiful than any one whom he had ever seen in the whole world. he hardly dared to breathe, but stretched his head as far forward through the leaves as he dared, and stared at her.
either he bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, the bough suddenly cracked, and that very moment the maiden slipped into the skin, sprang away like a roe, and as the moon was suddenly covered, disappeared from his eyes. hardly had she disappeared, before the count descended from the tree, and hastened after her with nimble steps. he had not been gone long before he saw, in the twilight, two figures coming over the meadow. it was the king and queen, who had perceived from a distance the light shining in the old woman’s little house, and were going to it. the count told them what wonderful things he had seen by the well, and they did not doubt that it had been their lost daughter. they walked onwards full of joy, and soon came to the little house. the geese were sitting all round it, and had thrust their heads under their wings and were sleeping, and not one of them moved. the king and queen looked in at the window, the old woman was sitting there quite quietly spinning, nodding her head and never looking round. the room was perfectly clean, as if the little mist men, who carry no dust on their feet, lived there. their daughter, however, they did not see.
they gazed at all this for a long time, at last they took heart, and knocked softly at the window. the old woman appeared to have been expecting them; she rose, and called out quite kindly, “come in,—i know you already.” when they had entered the room, the old woman said, “you might have spared yourself the long walk, if you had not three years ago unjustly driven away your child, who is so good and lovable. no harm has come to her; for three years she has had to tend the geese; with them she has learnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart. you, however, have been sufficiently punished by the misery in which you have lived.” then she went to the chamber and called, “come out, my little daughter.” thereupon the door opened, and the princess stepped out in her silken garments, with her golden hair and her shining eyes, and it was as if an angel from heaven had entered.
she went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks and kissed them; there was no help for it, they all had to weep for joy. the young count stood near them, and when she perceived him she became as red in the face as a moss-rose, she herself did not know why. the king said, “my dear child, i have given away my kingdom, what shall i give thee?”
“she needs nothing,” said the old woman. “i give her the tears that she has wept on your account; they are precious pearls, finer than those that are found in the sea, and worth more than your whole kingdom, and i give her my little house as payment for her services.” when the old woman had said that, she disappeared from their sight. the walls rattled a little, and when the king and queen looked round, the little house had changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been spread, and the servants were running hither and thither.
the story goes still further, but my grandmother, who related it to me, had partly lost her memory, and had forgotten the rest. i shall always believe that the beautiful princess married the count, and that they remained together in the palace, and lived there in all happiness so long as god willed it. whether the snow-white geese, which were kept near the little hut, were verily young maidens (no one need take offence,) whom the old woman had taken under her protection, and whether they now received their human form again, and stayed as handmaids to the young queen, i do not exactly know, but i suspect it.
this much is certain, that the old woman was no witch, as people thought, but a wise woman, who meant well. very likely it was she who, at the princess’s birth, gave her the gift of weeping pearls instead of tears. that does not happen now-a-days, or else the poor would soon become rich.
180 eve’s various children
when adam and eve were driven out of paradise, they were compelled to build a house for themselves on unfruitful ground, and eat their bread in the sweat of their brow. adam dug up the land, and eve span. every year eve brought a child into the world; but the children were unlike each other, some pretty, and some ugly. after a considerable time had gone by, god sent an angel to them, to announce that he was coming to inspect their household. eve, delighted that the lord should be so gracious, cleaned her house diligently, decked it with flowers, and strewed reeds on the floor. then she brought in her children, but only the beautiful ones. she washed and bathed them, combed their hair, put clean raiment on them, and cautioned them to conduct themselves decorously and modestly in the presence of the lord. they were to bow down before him civilly, hold out their hands, and to answer his questions modestly and sensibly. the ugly children were, however, not to let themselves be seen. one hid himself beneath the hay, another under the roof, a third in the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar, the sixth under a tub, the seventh beneath the wine-cask, the eighth under an old fur cloak, the ninth and tenth beneath the cloth out of which she always made their clothes, and the eleventh and twelfth under the leather out of which she cut their shoes. she had scarcely got ready, before there was a knock at the house-door. adam looked through a chink, and saw that it was the lord.
adam opened the door respectfully, and the heavenly father entered.
there, in a row, stood the pretty children, and bowed before him, held out their hands, and knelt down. the lord, however, began to bless them, laid his hands on the first, and said, “thou shalt be a powerful king;” and to the second, “thou a prince,” to the third, “thou a count,” to the fourth, “thou a knight,” to the fifth, “thou a nobleman,” to the sixth, “thou a burgher,” to the seventh, “thou a merchant,” to the eighth, “thou a learned man.” he bestowed upon them also all his richest blessings. when eve saw that the lord was so mild and gracious, she thought, “i will bring hither my ill-favoured children also, it may be that he will bestow his blessing on them likewise.” so she ran and brought them out of the hay, the straw, the stove, and wherever else she had concealed them. then came the whole coarse, dirty, shabby, sooty band. the lord smiled, looked at them all, and said, “i will bless these also.” he laid his hands on the first, and said to him, “thou shalt be a peasant,” to the second, “thou a fisherman,” to the third, “thou a smith,” to the fourth, “thou a tanner,” to the fifth, “thou a weaver,” to the sixth, “thou a shoemaker,” to the seventh, “thou a tailor,” to the eighth, “thou a potter,” to the ninth, “thou a waggoner,” to the tenth, “thou a sailor,” to the eleventh, “thou an errand-boy,” to the twelfth, “thou a scullion all the days of thy life.”
when eve had heard all this she said, “lord, how unequally thou dividest thy gifts! after all they are all of them my children, whom i have brought into the world, thy favours should be given to all alike.”
but god answered, “eve, thou dost not understand. it is right and necessary that the entire world should be supplied from thy children; if they were all princes and lords, who would grow corn, thresh it, grind and bake it? who would be blacksmiths, weavers, carpenters, masons, labourers, tailors and seamstresses? each shall have his own place, so that one shall support the other, and all shall be fed like the limbs of one body.” then eve answered, “ah, lord, forgive me, i was too quick in speaking to thee. have thy divine will with my children.”
181 the nix of the mill-pond
there was once upon a time a miller who lived with his wife in great contentment. they had money and land, and their prosperity increased year by year more and more. but ill-luck comes like a thief in the night, as their wealth had increased so did it again decrease, year by year, and at last the miller could hardly call the mill in which he lived, his own. he was in great distress, and when he lay down after his day’s work, found no rest, but tossed about in his bed, full of care. one morning he rose before daybreak and went out into the open air, thinking that perhaps there his heart might become lighter. as he was stepping over the mill-dam the first sunbeam was just breaking forth, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond. he turned round and perceived a beautiful woman, rising slowly out of the water. her long hair, which she was holding off her shoulders with her soft hands, fell down on both sides, and covered her white body. he soon saw that she was the nix of the mill-pond, and in his fright did not know whether he should run away or stay where he was. but the nix made her sweet voice heard, called him by his name, and asked him why he was so sad? the miller was at first struck dumb, but when he heard her speak so kindly, he took heart, and told her how he had formerly lived in wealth and happiness, but that now he was so poor that he did not know what to do.
“be easy,” answered the nix, “i will make thee richer and happier than thou hast ever been before, only thou must promise to give me the young thing which has just been born in thy house.” “what else can that be,”
thought the miller, “but a young puppy or kitten?” and he promised her what she desired. the nix descended into the water again, and he hurried back to his mill, consoled and in good spirits. he had not yet reached it, when the maid-servant came out of the house, and cried to him to rejoice, for his wife had given birth to a little boy. the miller stood as if struck by lightning; he saw very well that the cunning nix had been aware of it, and had cheated him. hanging his head, he went up to his wife’s bedside and when she said, “why dost thou not rejoice over the fine boy?” he told her what had befallen him, and what kind of a promise he had given to the nix. “of what use to me are riches and prosperity?” he added, “if i am to lose my child; but what can i do?” even the relations, who had come thither to wish them joy, did not know what to say. in the meantime prosperity again returned to the miller’s house. all that he undertook succeeded, it was as if presses and coffers filled themselves of their own accord, and as if money multiplied nightly in the cupboards. it was not long before his wealth was greater than it had ever been before. but he could not rejoice over it untroubled, for the bargain which he had made with the nix tormented his soul. whenever he passed the mill-pond, he feared she might ascend and remind him of his debt. he never let the boy himself go near the water. “beware,” he said to him, “if thou dost but touch the water, a hand will rise, seize thee, and draw thee down.” but as year after year went by and the nix did not show herself again, the miller began to feel at ease. the boy grew up to be a youth and was apprenticed to a huntsman. when he had learnt everything, and had become an excellent huntsman, the lord of the village took him into his service. in the village lived a beautiful and true-hearted maiden, who pleased the huntsman, and when his master perceived that, he gave him a little house, the two were married, lived peacefully and happily, and loved each other with all their hearts.
one day the huntsman was chasing a roe; and when the animal turned aside from the forest into the open country, he pursued it and at last shot it. he did not notice that he was now in the neighbourhood of the dangerous mill-pond, and went, after he had disembowelled the stag, to the water, in order to wash his blood-stained hands. scarcely, however, had he dipped them in than the nix ascended, smilingly wound her dripping arms around him, and drew him quickly down under the waves, which closed over him. when it was evening, and the huntsman did not return home, his wife became alarmed. she went out to seek him, and as he had often told her that he had to be on his guard against the snares of the nix, and dared not venture into the neighbourhood of the mill-pond, she already suspected what had happened. she hastened to the water, and when she found his hunting-pouch lying on the shore, she could no longer have any doubt of the misfortune. lamenting her sorrow, and wringing her hands, she called on her beloved by name, but in vain.
she hurried across to the other side of the pond, and called him anew; she reviled the nix with harsh words, but no answer followed. the surface of the water remained calm, only the crescent moon stared steadily back at her. the poor woman did not leave the pond. with hasty steps, she paced round and round it, without resting a moment, sometimes in silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes softly sobbing. at last her strength came to an end, she sank down to the ground and fell into a heavy sleep. presently a dream took possession of her. she was anxiously climbing upwards between great masses of rock; thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in her face, and the wind tossed her long hair about. when she had reached the summit, quite a different sight presented itself to her; the sky was blue, the air soft, the ground sloped gently downwards, and on a green meadow, gay with flowers of every colour, stood a pretty cottage. she went up to it and opened the door; there sat an old woman with white hair, who beckoned to her kindly. at that very moment, the poor woman awoke, day had already dawned, and she at once resolved to act in accordance with her dream. she laboriously climbed the mountain; everything was exactly as she had seen it in the night. the old woman received her kindly, and pointed out a chair on which she might sit. “thou must have met with a misfortune,” she said, “since thou hast sought out my lonely cottage.”
with tears, the woman related what had befallen her. “be comforted,”
said the old woman, “i will help thee. here is a golden comb for thee.
tarry till the full moon has risen, then go to the mill-pond, seat thyself on the shore, and comb thy long black hair with this comb. when thou hast done, lay it down on the bank, and thou wilt see what will happen.” the woman returned home, but the time till the full moon came, passed slowly. at last the shining disc appeared in the heavens, then she went out to the mill-pond, sat down and combed her long black hair with the golden comb, and when she had finished, she laid it down at the water’s edge. it was not long before there was a movement in the depths, a wave rose, rolled to the shore, and bore the comb away with it. in not more than the time necessary for the comb to sink to the bottom, the surface of the water parted, and the head of the huntsman arose. he did not speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful glances.
at the same instant, a second wave came rushing up, and covered the man’s head. all had vanished, the mill-pond lay peaceful as before, and nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it. full of sorrow, the woman went back, but again the dream showed her the cottage of the old woman. next morning she again set out and complained of her woes to the wise woman. the old woman gave her a golden flute, and said, “tarry till the full moon comes again, then take this flute; play a beautiful air on it, and when thou hast finished, lay it on the sand; then thou wilt see what will happen.” the wife did as the old woman told her. no sooner was the flute lying on the sand than there was a stirring in the depths, and a wave rushed up and bore the flute away with it.
immediately afterwards the water parted, and not only the head of the man, but half of his body also arose. he stretched out his arms longingly towards her, but a second wave came up, covered him, and drew him down again. “alas, what does it profit me?” said the unhappy woman, “that i should see my beloved, only to lose him again!” despair filled her heart anew, but the dream led her a third time to the house of the old woman. she set out, and the wise woman gave her a golden spinning-wheel, consoled her and said, “all is not yet fulfilled, tarry until the time of the full moon, then take the spinning-wheel, seat thyself on the shore, and spin the spool full, and when thou hast done that, place the spinning-wheel near the water, and thou wilt see what will happen.” the woman obeyed all she said exactly; as soon as the full moon showed itself, she carried the golden spinning-wheel to the shore, and span industriously until the flax came to an end, and the spool was quite filled with the threads. no sooner was the wheel standing on the shore than there was a more violent movement than before in the depths of the pond, and a mighty wave rushed up, and bore the wheel away with it. immediately the head and the whole body of the man rose into the air, in a water-spout. he quickly sprang to the shore, caught his wife by the hand and fled. but they had scarcely gone a very little distance, when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar, and streamed out over the open country. the fugitives already saw death before their eyes, when the woman in her terror implored the help of the old woman, and in an instant they were transformed, she into a toad, he into a frog. the flood which had overtaken them could not destroy them, but it tore them apart and carried them far away. when the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again, they regained their human form, but neither knew where the other was; they found themselves among strange people, who did not know their native land. high mountains and deep valleys lay between them. in order to keep themselves alive, they were both obliged to tend sheep. for many long years they drove their flocks through field and forest and were full of sorrow and longing. when spring had once more broken forth on the earth, they both went out one day with their flocks, and as chance would have it, they drew near each other. they met in a valley, but did not recognize each other; yet they rejoiced that they were no longer so lonely. henceforth they each day drove their flocks to the same place; they did not speak much, but they felt comforted. one evening when the full moon was shining in the sky, and the sheep were already at rest, the shepherd pulled the flute out of his pocket, and played on it a beautiful but sorrowful air. when he had finished he saw that the shepherdess was weeping bitterly. “why art thou weeping?” he asked.
“alas,” answered she, “thus shone the full moon when i played this air on the flute for the last time, and the head of my beloved rose out of the water.” he looked at her, and it seemed as if a veil fell from his eyes, and he recognized his dear wife, and when she looked at him, and the moon shone in his face she knew him also. they embraced and kissed each other, and no one need ask if they were happy.
182 the little folks’ presents
a tailor and a goldsmith were travelling together, and one evening when the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the sound of distant music, which became more and more distinct. it sounded strange, but so pleasant that they forgot all their weariness and stepped quickly onwards. the moon had already arisen when they reached a hill on which they saw a crowd of little men and women, who had taken each other’s hands, and were whirling round in the dance with the greatest pleasure and delight.
they sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music which the travellers had heard. in the midst of them sat an old man who was rather taller than the rest. he wore a parti-coloured coat, and his iron-grey beard hung down over his breast. the two remained standing full of astonishment, and watched the dance. the old man made a sign that they should enter, and the little folks willingly opened their circle. the goldsmith, who had a hump, and like all hunchbacks was brave enough, stepped in; the tailor felt a little afraid at first, and held back, but when he saw how merrily all was going, he plucked up his courage, and followed. the circle closed again directly, and the little folks went on singing and dancing with the wildest leaps. the old man, however, took a large knife which hung to his girdle, whetted it, and when it was sufficiently sharpened, he looked round at the strangers.
they were terrified, but they had not much time for reflection, for the old man seized the goldsmith and with the greatest speed, shaved the hair of his head clean off, and then the same thing happened to the tailor. but their fear left them when, after he had finished his work, the old man clapped them both on the shoulder in a friendly manner, as much as to say, they had behaved well to let all that be done to them willingly, and without any struggle. he pointed with his finger to a heap of coals which lay at one side, and signified to the travellers by his gestures that they were to fill their pockets with them. both of them obeyed, although they did not know of what use the coals would be to them, and then they went on their way to seek a shelter for the night. when they had got into the valley, the clock of the neighbouring monastery struck twelve, and the song ceased. in a moment all had vanished, and the hill lay in solitude in the moonlight.
the two travellers found an inn, and covered themselves up on their straw-beds with their coats, but in their weariness forgot to take the coals out of them before doing so. a heavy weight on their limbs awakened them earlier than usual. they felt in the pockets, and could not believe their eyes when they saw that they were not filled with coals, but with pure gold; happily, too, the hair of their heads and beards was there again as thick as ever.
they had now become rich folks, but the goldsmith, who, in accordance with his greedy disposition, had filled his pockets better, was as rich again as the tailor. a greedy man, even if he has much, still wishes to have more, so the goldsmith proposed to the tailor that they should wait another day, and go out again in the evening in order to bring back still greater treasures from the old man on the hill. the tailor refused, and said, “i have enough and am content; now i shall be a master, and marry my dear object (for so he called his sweetheart), and i am a happy man.” but he stayed another day to please him. in the evening the goldsmith hung a couple of bags over his shoulders that he might be able to stow away a great deal, and took the road to the hill.
he found, as on the night before, the little folks at their singing and dancing, and the old man again shaved him clean, and signed to him to take some coal away with him. he was not slow about sticking as much into his bags as would go, went back quite delighted, and covered himself over with his coat. “even if the gold does weigh heavily,” said he, “i will gladly bear that,” and at last he fell asleep with the sweet anticipation of waking in the morning an enormously rich man.
when he opened his eyes, he got up in haste to examine his pockets, but how amazed he was when he drew nothing out of them but black coals, and that howsoever often he put his hands in them. “the gold i got the night before is still there for me,” thought he, and went and brought it out, but how shocked he was when he saw that it likewise had again turned into coal. he smote his forehead with his dusty black hand, and then he felt that his whole head was bald and smooth, as was also the place where his beard should have been. but his misfortunes were not yet over; he now remarked for the first time that in addition to the hump on his back, a second, just as large, had grown in front on his breast. then he recognized the punishment of his greediness, and began to weep aloud. the good tailor, who was wakened by this, comforted the unhappy fellow as well as he could, and said, “thou hast been my comrade in my travelling time; thou shalt stay with me and share in my wealth.” he kept his word, but the poor goldsmith was obliged to carry the two humps as long as he lived, and to cover his bald head with a cap.
183 the giant and the tailor
a certain tailor who was great at boasting but ill at doing, took it into his head to go abroad for a while, and look about the world. as soon as he could manage it, he left his workshop, and wandered on his way, over hill and dale, sometimes hither, sometimes thither, but ever on and on. once when he was out he perceived in the blue distance a steep hill, and behind it a tower reaching to the clouds, which rose up out of a wild dark forest. “thunder and lightning,” cried the tailor, “what is that?” and as he was strongly goaded by curiosity, he went boldly towards it. but what made the tailor open his eyes and mouth when he came near it, was to see that the tower had legs, and leapt in one bound over the steep hill, and was now standing as an all powerful giant before him. “what dost thou want here, thou tiny fly’s leg?”
cried the giant, with a voice as if it were thundering on every side.
the tailor whimpered, “i want just to look about and see if i can earn a bit of bread for myself, in this forest.” “if that is what thou art after,” said the giant, “thou mayst have a place with me.” “if it must be, why not? what wages shall i receive?” “thou shalt hear what wages thou shalt have. every year three hundred and sixty-five days, and when it is leap-year, one more into the bargain. does that suit thee?” “all right,” replied the tailor, and thought, in his own mind, “a man must cut his coat according to his cloth; i will try to get away as fast as i can.” on this the giant said to him, “go, little ragamuffin, and fetch me a jug of water.” “had i not better bring the well itself at once, and the spring too?” asked the boaster, and went with the pitcher to the water. “what! the well and the spring too,” growled the giant in his beard, for he was rather clownish and stupid, and began to be afraid. “that knave is not a fool, he has a wizard in his body. be on thy guard, old hans, this is no serving-man for thee.” when the tailor had brought the water, the giant bade him go into the forest, and cut a couple of blocks of wood and bring them back. “why not the whole forest, at once, with one stroke. the whole forest, young and old, with all that is there, both rough and smooth?” asked the little tailor, and went to cut the wood. “what! the whole forest, young and old, with all that is there, both rough and smooth, and the well and its spring too,”
growled the credulous giant in his beard, and was still more terrified.
“the knave can do much more than bake apples, and has a wizard in his body. be on thy guard, old hans, this is no serving-man for thee!” when the tailor had brought the wood, the giant commanded him to shoot two or three wild boars for supper. “why not rather a thousand at one shot, and bring them all here?” inquired the ostentatious tailor. “what!”
cried the timid giant in great terror; “let well alone to-night, and lie down to rest.”
the giant was so terribly alarmed that he could not close an eye all night long for thinking what would be the best way to get rid of this accursed sorcerer of a servant. time brings counsel. next morning the giant and the tailor went to a marsh, round which stood a number of willow-trees. then said the giant, “hark thee, tailor, seat thyself on one of the willow-branches, i long of all things to see if thou art big enough to bend it down.” all at once the tailor was sitting on it, holding his breath, and making himself so heavy that the bough bent down. when, however, he was compelled to draw breath, it hurried him (for unfortunately he had not put his goose in his pocket) so high into the air that he never was seen again, and this to the great delight of the giant. if the tailor has not fallen down again, he must be hovering about in the air.
184 the nail
a merchant had done good business at the fair; he had sold his wares, and lined his money-bags with gold and silver. then he wanted to travel homewards, and be in his own house before nightfall. so he packed his trunk with the money on his horse, and rode away.
at noon he rested in a town, and when he wanted to go farther the stable-boy brought out his horse and said, “a nail is wanting, sir, in the shoe of its left hind foot.” “let it be wanting,” answered the merchant; “the shoe will certainly stay on for the six miles i have still to go. i am in a hurry.”
in the afternoon, when he once more alighted and had his horse fed, the stable-boy went into the room to him and said, “sir, a shoe is missing from your horse’s left hind foot. shall i take him to the blacksmith?”
“let it still be wanting,” answered the man; “the horse can very well hold out for the couple of miles which remain. i am in haste.”
he rode forth, but before long the horse began to limp. it had not limped long before it began to stumble, and it had not stumbled long before it fell down and broke its leg. the merchant was forced to leave the horse where it was, and unbuckle the trunk, take it on his back, and go home on foot. and there he did not arrive until quite late at night. “and that unlucky nail,” said he to himself, “has caused all this disaster.”
hasten slowly.
185 the poor boy in the grave
there was once a poor shepherd-boy whose father and mother were dead, and he was placed by the authorities in the house of a rich man, who was to feed him and bring him up. the man and his wife, had however, bad hearts, and were greedy and anxious about their riches, and vexed whenever any one put a morsel of their bread in his mouth. the poor young fellow might do what he liked, he got little to eat, but only so many blows the more.
one day he had to watch a hen and her chickens, but she ran through a quick-set hedge with them, and a hawk darted down instantly, and carried her off through the air. the boy called, “thief! thief!
rascal!” with all the strength of his body. but what good did that do?
the hawk did not bring its prey back again. the man heard the noise, and ran to the spot, and as soon as he saw that his hen was gone, he fell in a rage, and gave the boy such a beating that he could not stir for two days. then he had to take care of the chickens without the hen, but now his difficulty was greater, for one ran here and the other there. he thought he was doing a very wise thing when he tied them all together with a string, because then the hawk would not be able to steal any of them away from him. but he was very much mistaken. after two days, worn out with running about and hunger, he fell asleep; the bird of prey came, and seized one of the chickens, and as the others were tied fast to it, it carried them all off together, perched itself on a tree, and devoured them. the farmer was just coming home, and when he saw the misfortune, he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifully that he was forced to lie in bed for several days.
when he was on his legs again, the farmer said to him, “thou art too stupid for me, i cannot make a herdsman of thee, thou must go as errand-boy.” then he sent him to the judge, to whom he was to carry a basketful of grapes, and he gave him a letter as well. on the way hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boy so violently that he ate two of the bunches of grapes. he took the basket to the judge, but when the judge had read the letter, and counted the bunches he said, “two clusters are wanting.” the boy confessed quite honestly that, driven by hunger and thirst, he had devoured the two which were wanting. the judge wrote a letter to the farmer, and asked for the same number of grapes again. these also the boy had to take to him with a letter. as he again was so extremely hungry and thirsty, he could not help it, and again ate two bunches. but first he took the letter out of the basket, put it under a stone and seated himself thereon in order that the letter might not see and betray him. the judge, however, again made him give an explanation about the missing bunches. “ah,” said the boy, “how have you learnt that? the letter could not know about it, for i put it under a stone before i did it.” the judge could not help laughing at the boy’s simplicity, and sent the man a letter wherein he cautioned him to keep the poor boy better, and not let him want for meat and drink, and also that he was to teach him what was right and what was wrong.
“i will soon show thee the difference,” said the hard man, “if thou wilt eat, thou must work, and if thou dost anything wrong, thou shalt be quite sufficiently taught by blows.”
the next day he set him a hard task. he was to chop two bundles of straw for food for the horses, and then the man threatened: “in five hours,” said he, “i shall be back again, and if the straw is not cut to chaff by that time, i will beat thee until thou canst not move a limb.”
the farmer went with his wife, the man-servant and the girl, to the yearly fair, and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bit of bread. the boy seated himself on the bench, and began to work with all his might. as he got warm over it he put his little coat off and threw it on the straw. in his terror lest he should not get done in time he kept constantly cutting, and in his haste, without noticing it, he chopped his little coat as well as the straw. he became aware of the misfortune too late; there was no repairing it. “ah,” cried he, “now all is over with me! the wicked man did not threaten me for nothing; if he comes back and sees what i have done, he will kill me. rather than that i will take my own life.”
the boy had once heard the farmer’s wife say, “i have a pot with poison in it under my bed.” she, however, had only said that to keep away greedy people, for there was honey in it. the boy crept under the bed, brought out the pot, and ate all that was in it. “i do not know,” said he, “folks say death is bitter, but it tastes very sweet to me. it is no wonder that the farmer’s wife has so often longed for death.” he seated himself in a little chair, and was prepared to die. but instead of becoming weaker he felt himself strengthened by the nourishing food.
“it cannot have been poison,” thought he, “but the farmer once said there was a small bottle of poison for flies in the box in which he keeps his clothes; that, no doubt, will be the true poison, and bring death to me.” it was, however, no poison for flies, but hungarian wine.
the boy got out the bottle, and emptied it. “this death tastes sweet too,” said he, but shortly after when the wine began to mount into his brain and stupefy him, he thought his end was drawing near. “i feel that i must die,” said he, “i will go away to the churchyard, and seek a grave.” he staggered out, reached the churchyard, and laid himself in a newly dug grave. he lost his senses more and more. in the neighbourhood was an inn where a wedding was being kept; when he heard the music, he fancied he was already in paradise, until at length he lost all consciousness. the poor boy never awoke again; the heat of the strong wine and the cold night-dew deprived him of life, and he remained in the grave in which he had laid himself.
when the farmer heard the news of the boy’s death he was terrified, and afraid of being brought to justice indeed, his distress took such a powerful hold of him that he fell fainting to the ground. his wife, who was standing on the hearth with a pan of hot fat, ran to him to help him. but the flames darted against the pan, the whole house caught fire, in a few hours it lay in ashes, and the rest of the years they had to live they passed in poverty and misery, tormented by the pangs of conscience.
186 the true sweethearts
there was once on a time a girl who was young and beautiful, but she had lost her mother when she was quite a child, and her step-mother did all she could to make the girl’s life wretched. whenever this woman gave her anything to do, she worked at it indefatigably, and did everything that lay in her power. still she could not touch the heart of the wicked woman by that; she was never satisfied; it was never enough. the harder the girl worked, the more work was put upon her, and all that the woman thought of was how to weigh her down with still heavier burdens, and make her life still more miserable.
one day she said to her, “here are twelve pounds of feathers which thou must pick, and if they are not done this evening, thou mayst expect a good beating. dost thou imagine thou art to idle away the whole day?”
the poor girl sat down to the work, but tears ran down her cheeks as she did so, for she saw plainly enough that it was quite impossible to finish the work in one day. whenever she had a little heap of feathers lying before her, and she sighed or smote her hands together in her anguish, they flew away, and she had to pick them out again, and begin her work anew. then she put her elbows on the table, laid her face in her two hands, and cried, “is there no one, then, on god’s earth to have pity on me?” then she heard a low voice which said, “be comforted, my child, i have come to help thee.” the maiden looked up, and an old woman was by her side. she took the girl kindly by the hand, and said, “only tell me what is troubling thee.” as she spoke so kindly, the girl told her of her miserable life, and how one burden after another was laid upon her, and she never could get to the end of the work which was given to her. “if i have not done these feathers by this evening, my step-mother will beat me; she has threatened she will, and i know she keeps her word.” her tears began to flow again, but the good old woman said, “do not be afraid, my child; rest a while, and in the meantime i will look to thy work.” the girl lay down on her bed, and soon fell asleep. the old woman seated herself at the table with the feathers, and how they did fly off the quills, which she scarcely touched with her withered hands! the twelve pounds were soon finished, and when the girl awoke, great snow-white heaps were lying, piled up, and everything in the room was neatly cleared away, but the old woman had vanished.
the maiden thanked god, and sat still till evening came, when the step-mother came in and marvelled to see the work completed. “just look, you awkward creature,” said she, “what can be done when people are industrious; and why couldst thou not set about something else?
there thou sittest with thy hands crossed.” when she went out she said, “the creature is worth more than her salt. i must give her some work that is still harder.”
next morning she called the girl, and said, “there is a spoon for thee; with that thou must empty out for me the great pond which is beside the garden, and if it is not done by night, thou knowest what will happen.”
the girl took the spoon, and saw that it was full of holes; but even if it had not been, she never could have emptied the pond with it. she set to work at once, knelt down by the water, into which her tears were falling, and began to empty it. but the good old woman appeared again, and when she learnt the cause of her grief, she said, “be of good cheer, my child. go into the thicket and lie down and sleep; i will soon do thy work.” as soon as the old woman was alone, she barely touched the pond, and a vapour rose up on high from the water, and mingled itself with the clouds. gradually the pond was emptied, and when the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither, she saw nothing but the fishes which were struggling in the mud. she went to her step-mother, and showed her that the work was done. “it ought to have been done long before this,” said she, and grew white with anger, but she meditated something new.
on the third morning she said to the girl, “thou must build me a castle on the plain there, and it must be ready by the evening.” the maiden was dismayed, and said, “how can i complete such a great work?” “i will endure no opposition,” screamed the step-mother. “if thou canst empty a pond with a spoon that is full of holes, thou canst build a castle too.
i will take possession of it this very day, and if anything is wanting, even if it be the most trifling thing in the kitchen or cellar, thou knowest what lies before thee!” she drove the girl out, and when she entered the valley, the rocks were there, piled up one above the other, and all her strength would not have enabled her even to move the very smallest of them. she sat down and wept, and still she hoped the old woman would help her. the old woman was not long in coming; she comforted her and said, “lie down there in the shade and sleep, and i will soon build the castle for thee. if it would be a pleasure to thee, thou canst live in it thyself.” when the maiden had gone away, the old woman touched the gray rocks. they began to rise, and immediately moved together as if giants had built the walls; and on these the building arose, and it seemed as if countless hands were working invisibly, and placing one stone upon another. there was a dull heavy noise from the ground; pillars arose of their own accord on high, and placed themselves in order near each other. the tiles laid themselves in order on the roof, and when noon-day came, the great weather-cock was already turning itself on the summit of the tower, like a golden figure of the virgin with fluttering garments. the inside of the castle was being finished while evening was drawing near. how the old woman managed it, i know not; but the walls of the rooms were hung with silk and velvet, embroidered chairs were there, and richly ornamented arm-chairs by marble tables; crystal chandeliers hung down from the ceilings, and mirrored themselves in the smooth pavement; green parrots were there in gilt cages, and so were strange birds which sang most beautifully, and there was on all sides as much magnificence as if a king were going to live there. the sun was just setting when the girl awoke, and the brightness of a thousand lights flashed in her face. she hurried to the castle, and entered by the open door. the steps were spread with red cloth, and the golden balustrade beset with flowering trees. when she saw the splendour of the apartment, she stood as if turned to stone.
who knows how long she might have stood there if she had not remembered the step-mother? “alas!” she said to herself, “if she could but be satisfied at last, and would give up making my life a misery to me.”
the girl went and told her that the castle was ready. “i will move into it at once,” said she, and rose from her seat. when they entered the castle, she was forced to hold her hand before her eyes, the brilliancy of everything was so dazzling. “thou seest,” said she to the girl, “how easy it has been for thee to do this; i ought to have given thee something harder.” she went through all the rooms, and examined every corner to see if anything was wanting or defective; but she could discover nothing. “now we will go down below,” said she, looking at the girl with malicious eyes. “the kitchen and the cellar still have to be examined, and if thou hast forgotten anything thou shalt not escape thy punishment.” but the fire was burning on the hearth, and the meat was cooking in the pans, the tongs and shovel were leaning against the wall, and the shining brazen utensils all arranged in sight. nothing was wanting, not even a coal-box and water-pail. “which is the way to the cellar?” she cried. “if that is not abundantly filled, it shall go ill with thee.” she herself raised up the trap-door and descended; but she had hardly made two steps before the heavy trap-door which was only laid back, fell down. the girl heard a scream, lifted up the door very quickly to go to her aid, but she had fallen down, and the girl found her lying lifeless at the bottom.
and now the magnificent castle belonged to the girl alone. she at first did not know how to reconcile herself to her good fortune. beautiful dresses were hanging in the wardrobes, the chests were filled with gold or silver, or with pearls and jewels, and she never felt a desire that she was not able to gratify. and soon the fame of the beauty and riches of the maiden went over all the world. wooers presented themselves daily, but none pleased her. at length the son of the king came and he knew how to touch her heart, and she betrothed herself to him. in the garden of the castle was a lime-tree, under which they were one day sitting together, when he said to her, “i will go home and obtain my father’s consent to our marriage. i entreat thee to wait for me here under this lime-tree, i shall be back with thee in a few hours.” the maiden kissed him on his left cheek, and said, “keep true to me, and never let any one else kiss thee on this cheek. i will wait here under the lime-tree until thou returnest.”
the maid stayed beneath the lime-tree until sunset, but he did not return. she sat three days from morning till evening, waiting for him, but in vain. as he still was not there by the fourth day, she said, “some accident has assuredly befallen him. i will go out and seek him, and will not come back until i have found him.” she packed up three of her most beautiful dresses, one embroidered with bright stars, the second with silver moons, the third with golden suns, tied up a handful of jewels in her handkerchief, and set out. she inquired everywhere for her betrothed, but no one had seen him; no one knew anything about him.
far and wide did she wander through the world, but she found him not.
at last she hired herself to a farmer as a cow-herd, and buried her dresses and jewels beneath a stone.
and now she lived as a herdswoman, guarded her herd, and was very sad and full of longing for her beloved one; she had a little calf which she taught to know her, and fed it out of her own hand, and when she said,
“little calf, little calf, kneel by my side, and do not forget thy shepherd-maid, as the prince forgot his betrothed bride, who waited for him ’neath the lime-tree’s shade.”
the little calf knelt down, and she stroked it.
and when she had lived for a couple of years alone and full of grief, a report was spread over all the land that the king’s daughter was about to celebrate her marriage. the road to the town passed through the village where the maiden was living, and it came to pass that once when the maiden was driving out her herd, her bridegroom travelled by. he was sitting proudly on his horse, and never looked round, but when she saw him she recognized her beloved, and it was just as if a sharp knife had pierced her heart. “alas!” said she, “i believed him true to me, but he has forgotten me.”
next day he again came along the road. when he was near her she said to the little calf,
“little calf, little calf, kneel by my side, and do not forget thy shepherd-maid, as the prince forgot his betrothed bride, who waited for him ’neath the lime-tree’s shade.”
when he was aware of the voice, he looked down and reined in his horse.
he looked into the herd’s face, and then put his hands before his eyes as if he were trying to remember something, but he soon rode onwards and was out of sight. “alas!” said she, “he no longer knows me,” and her grief was ever greater.
soon after this a great festival three days long was to be held at the king’s court, and the whole country was invited to it.
“now will i try my last chance,” thought the maiden, and when evening came she went to the stone under which she had buried her treasures.
she took out the dress with the golden suns, put it on, and adorned herself with the jewels. she let down her hair, which she had concealed under a handkerchief, and it fell down in long curls about her, and thus she went into the town, and in the darkness was observed by no one. when she entered the brightly-lighted hall, every one started back in amazement, but no one knew who she was. the king’s son went to meet her, but he did not recognize her. he led her out to dance, and was so enchanted with her beauty, that he thought no more of the other bride.
when the feast was over, she vanished in the crowd, and hastened before daybreak to the village, where she once more put on her herd’s dress.
next evening she took out the dress with the silver moons, and put a half-moon made of precious stones in her hair. when she appeared at the festival, all eyes were turned upon her, but the king’s son hastened to meet her, and filled with love for her, danced with her alone, and no longer so much as glanced at anyone else. before she went away she was forced to promise him to come again to the festival on the last evening.
when she appeared for the third time, she wore the star-dress which sparkled at every step she took, and her hair-ribbon and girdle were starred with jewels. the prince had already been waiting for her for a long time, and forced his way up to her. “do but tell who thou art,”
said he, “i feel just as if i had already known thee a long time.”
“dost thou not know what i did when thou leftest me?” then she stepped up to him, and kissed him on his left cheek, and in a moment it was as if scales fell from his eyes, and he recognized the true bride. “come,”
said he to her, “here i stay no longer,” gave her his hand, and led her down to the carriage. the horses hurried away to the magic castle as if the wind had been harnessed to the carriage. the illuminated windows already shone in the distance. when they drove past the lime-tree, countless glow-worms were swarming about it. it shook its branches, and sent forth their fragrance. on the steps flowers were blooming, and the room echoed with the song of strange birds, but in the hall the entire court was assembled, and the priest was waiting to marry the bridegroom to the true bride.
187 the hare and the hedgehog
this story, my dear young folks, seems to be false, but it really is true, for my grandfather, from whom i have it, used always, when relating it, to say complacently, “it must be true, my son, or else no one could tell it to you.” the story is as follows. one sunday morning about harvest time, just as the buckwheat was in bloom, the sun was shining brightly in heaven, the east wind was blowing warmly over the stubble-fields, the larks were singing in the air, the bees buzzing among the buckwheat, the people were all going in their sunday clothes to church, and all creatures were happy, and the hedgehog was happy too.
the hedgehog, however, was standing by his door with his arms akimbo, enjoying the morning breezes, and slowly trilling a little song to himself, which was neither better nor worse than the songs which hedgehogs are in the habit of singing on a blessed sunday morning.
whilst he was thus singing half aloud to himself, it suddenly occurred to him that, while his wife was washing and drying the children, he might very well take a walk into the field, and see how his turnips were going on. the turnips were, in fact, close beside his house, and he and his family were accustomed to eat them, for which reason he looked upon them as his own. no sooner said than done. the hedgehog shut the house-door behind him, and took the path to the field. he had not gone very far from home, and was just turning round the sloe-bush which stands there outside the field, to go up into the turnip-field, when he observed the hare who had gone out on business of the same kind, namely, to visit his cabbages. when the hedgehog caught sight of the hare, he bade him a friendly good morning. but the hare, who was in his own way a distinguished gentleman, and frightfully haughty, did not return the hedgehog’s greeting, but said to him, assuming at the same time a very contemptuous manner, “how do you happen to be running about here in the field so early in the morning?” “i am taking a walk,” said the hedgehog. “a walk!” said the hare, with a smile. “it seems to me that you might use your legs for a better purpose.” this answer made the hedgehog furiously angry, for he can bear anything but an attack on his legs, just because they are crooked by nature. so now the hedgehog said to the hare, “you seem to imagine that you can do more with your legs than i with mine.” “that is just what i do think,” said the hare.
“that can be put to the test,” said the hedgehog. “i wager that if we run a race, i will outstrip you.” “that is ridiculous! you with your short legs!” said the hare, “but for my part i am willing, if you have such a monstrous fancy for it. what shall we wager?” “a golden louis-d’or and a bottle of brandy,” said the hedgehog. “done,” said the hare. “shake hands on it, and then we may as well come off at once.”
“nay,” said the hedgehog, “there is no such great hurry! i am still fasting, i will go home first, and have a little breakfast. in half-an-hour i will be back again at this place.”
hereupon the hedgehog departed, for the hare was quite satisfied with this. on his way the hedgehog thought to himself, “the hare relies on his long legs, but i will contrive to get the better of him. he may be a great man, but he is a very silly fellow, and he shall pay for what he has said.” so when the hedgehog reached home, he said to his wife, “wife, dress thyself quickly, thou must go out to the field with me.”
“what is going on, then?” said his wife. “i have made a wager with the hare, for a gold louis-d’or and a bottle of brandy. i am to run a race with him, and thou must be present.” “good heavens, husband,” the wife now cried, “art thou not right in thy mind, hast thou completely lost thy wits? what can make thee want to run a race with the hare?” “hold thy tongue, woman,” said the hedgehog, “that is my affair. don’t begin to discuss things which are matters for men. be off, dress thyself, and come with me.” what could the hedgehog’s wife do? she was forced to obey him, whether she liked it or not.
so when they had set out on their way together, the hedgehog said to his wife, “now pay attention to what i am going to say. look you, i will make the long field our race-course. the hare shall run in one furrow, and i in another, and we will begin to run from the top. now all that thou hast to do is to place thyself here below in the furrow, and when the hare arrives at the end of the furrow, on the other side of thee, thou must cry out to him, ‘i am here already!’”
then they reached the field, and the hedgehog showed his wife her place, and then walked up the field. when he reached the top, the hare was already there. “shall we start?” said the hare. “certainly,” said the hedgehog. “then both at once.” so saying, each placed himself in his own furrow. the hare counted, “once, twice, thrice, and away!” and went off like a whirlwind down the field. the hedgehog, however, only ran about three paces, and then he stooped down in the furrow, and stayed quietly where he was. when the hare therefore arrived in full career at the lower end of the field, the hedgehog’s wife met him with the cry, “i am here already!” the hare was shocked and wondered not a little, he thought no other than that it was the hedgehog himself who was calling to him, for the hedgehog’s wife looked just like her husband. the hare, however, thought to himself, “that has not been done fairly,” and cried, “it must be run again, let us have it again.” and once more he went off like the wind in a storm, so that he seemed to fly. but the hedgehog’s wife stayed quietly in her place. so when the hare reached the top of the field, the hedgehog himself cried out to him, “i am here already.” the hare, however, quite beside himself with anger, cried, “it must be run again, we must have it again.” “all right,” answered the hedgehog, “for my part we’ll run as often as you choose.” so the hare ran seventy-three times more, and the hedgehog always held out against him, and every time the hare reached either the top or the bottom, either the hedgehog or his wife said, “i am here already.”
at the seventy-fourth time, however, the hare could no longer reach the end. in the middle of the field he fell to the ground, blood streamed out of his mouth, and he lay dead on the spot. but the hedgehog took the louis-d’or which he had won and the bottle of brandy, called his wife out of the furrow, and both went home together in great delight, and if they are not dead, they are living there still.
this is how it happened that the hedgehog made the hare run races with him on the buxtehuder heath till he died, and since that time no hare has ever had any fancy for running races with a buxtehuder hedgehog.
the moral of this story, however, is, firstly, that no one, however great he may be, should permit himself to jest at any one beneath him, even if he be only a hedgehog. and, secondly, it teaches, that when a man marries, he should take a wife in his own position, who looks just as he himself looks. so whosoever is a hedgehog let him see to it that his wife is a hedgehog also, and so forth.
188 the spindle, the shuttle, and the needle
there was once a girl whose father and mother died while she was still a little child. all alone, in a small house at the end of the village, dwelt her godmother, who supported herself by spinning, weaving, and sewing. the old woman took the forlorn child to live with her, kept her to her work, and educated her in all that is good. when the girl was fifteen years old, the old woman became ill, called the child to her bedside, and said, “dear daughter, i feel my end drawing near. i leave thee the little house, which will protect thee from wind and weather, and my spindle, shuttle, and needle, with which thou canst earn thy bread.” then she laid her hands on the girl’s head, blessed her, and said, “only preserve the love of god in thy heart, and all will go well with thee.” thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she was laid in the earth, the maiden followed the coffin, weeping bitterly, and paid her the last mark of respect. and now the maiden lived quite alone in the little house, and was industrious, and span, wove, and sewed, and the blessing of the good old woman was on all that she did. it seemed as if the flax in the room increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove a piece of cloth or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once found a buyer who paid her amply for it, so that she was in want of nothing, and even had something to share with others.
about this time, the son of the king was travelling about the country looking for a bride. he was not to choose a poor one, and did not want to have a rich one. so he said, “she shall be my wife who is the poorest, and at the same time the richest.” when he came to the village where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he did wherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl in the place? they first named the richest; the poorest, they said, was the girl who lived in the small house quite at the end of the village. the rich girl was sitting in all her splendour before the door of her house, and when the prince approached her, she got up, went to meet him, and made him a low curtsey. he looked at her, said nothing, and rode on. when he came to the house of the poor girl, she was not standing at the door, but sitting in her little room. he stopped his horse, and saw through the window, on which the bright sun was shining, the girl sitting at her spinning-wheel, busily spinning. she looked up, and when she saw that the prince was looking in, she blushed all over her face, let her eyes fall, and went on spinning. i do not know whether, just at that moment, the thread was quite even; but she went on spinning until the king’s son had ridden away again. then she went to the window, opened it, and said, “it is so warm in this room!” but she still looked after him as long as she could distinguish the white feathers in his hat. then she sat down to work again in her own room and went on with her spinning, and a saying which the old woman had often repeated when she was sitting at her work, came into her mind, and she sang these words to herself,—
“spindle, my spindle, haste, haste thee away, and here to my house bring the wooer, i pray.”
and what do you think happened? the spindle sprang out of her hand in an instant, and out of the door, and when, in her astonishment, she got up and looked after it, she saw that it was dancing out merrily into the open country, and drawing a shining golden thread after it. before long, it had entirely vanished from her sight. as she had now no spindle, the girl took the weaver’s shuttle in her hand, sat down to her loom, and began to weave.
the spindle, however, danced continually onwards, and just as the thread came to an end, reached the prince. “what do i see?” he cried; “the spindle certainly wants to show me the way!” turned his horse about, and rode back with the golden thread. the girl was, however, sitting at her work singing,
“shuttle, my shuttle, weave well this day, and guide the wooer to me, i pray.”
immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the door.
before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet which was more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet beheld. lilies and roses blossomed on both sides of it, and on a golden ground in the centre green branches ascended, under which bounded hares and rabbits, stags and deer stretched their heads in between them, brightly-coloured birds were sitting in the branches above; they lacked nothing but the gift of song. the shuttle leapt hither and thither, and everything seemed to grow of its own accord.
as the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew. she held the needle in her hand and sang,
“needle, my needle, sharp-pointed and fine, prepare for a wooer this house of mine.”
then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhere about the room as quick as lightning. it was just as if invisible spirits were working; they covered tables and benches with green cloth in an instant, and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silken curtains. hardly had the needle put in the last stitch than the maiden saw through the window the white feathers of the prince, whom the spindle had brought thither by the golden thread. he alighted, stepped over the carpet into the house, and when he entered the room, there stood the maiden in her poor garments, but she shone out from within them like a rose surrounded by leaves. “thou art the poorest and also the richest,” said he to her. “come with me, thou shalt be my bride.”
she did not speak, but she gave him her hand. then he gave her a kiss, led her forth, lifted her on to his horse, and took her to the royal castle, where the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings. the spindle, shuttle, and needle were preserved in the treasure-chamber, and held in great honour.
189 the peasant and the devil
there was once on a time a far-sighted, crafty peasant whose tricks were much talked about. the best story is, however, how he once got hold of the devil, and made a fool of him. the peasant had one day been working in his field, and as twilight had set in, was making ready for the journey home, when he saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his field, and when, full of astonishment, he went up to it, a little black devil was sitting on the live coals. “thou dost indeed sit upon a treasure!” said the peasant. “yes, in truth,” replied the devil, “on a treasure which contains more gold and silver than thou hast ever seen in thy life!” “the treasure lies in my field and belongs to me,” said the peasant. “it is thine,” answered the devil, “if thou wilt for two years give me the half of everything thy field produces. money i have enough of, but i have a desire for the fruits of the earth.” the peasant agreed to the bargain. “in order, however, that no dispute may arise about the division,” said he, “everything that is above ground shall belong to thee, and what is under the earth to me.” the devil was quite satisfied with that, but the cunning peasant had sown turnips.
now when the time for harvest came, the devil appeared and wanted to take away his crop; but he found nothing but the yellow withered leaves, while the peasant, full of delight, was digging up his turnips.
“thou hast had the best of it for once,” said the devil, “but the next time that won’t do. what grows above ground shall be thine, and what is under it, mine.” “i am willing,” replied the peasant; but when the time came to sow, he did not again sow turnips, but wheat. the grain became ripe, and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks down to the ground. when the devil came, he found nothing but the stubble, and went away in a fury down into a cleft in the rocks. “that is the way to cheat the devil,” said the peasant, and went and fetched away the treasure.
190 the crumbs on the table
a countryman one day said to his little puppies, “come into the parlour and enjoy yourselves, and pick up the bread-crumbs on the table; your mistress has gone out to pay some visits.” then the little dogs said, “no, no, we will not go. if the mistress gets to know it, she will beat us.” the countryman said, “she will know nothing about it. do come; after all, she never gives you anything good.” then the little dogs again said, “nay, nay, we must let it alone; we must not go.” but the countryman let them have no peace until at last they went, and got on the table, and ate up the bread-crumbs with all their might. but at that very moment the mistress came, and seized the stick in great haste, and beat them and treated them very hardly. and when they were outside the house, the little dogs said to the countryman, “dost, dost, dost, dost, dost thou see?” then the countryman laughed and said, “didn’t, didn’t, didn’t, you expect it?” so they just had to run away.
191 the sea-hare
there was once upon a time a princess, who, high under the battlements in her castle, had an apartment with twelve windows, which looked out in every possible direction, and when she climbed up to it and looked around her, she could inspect her whole kingdom. when she looked out of the first, her sight was more keen than that of any other human being; from the second she could see still better, from the third more distinctly still, and so it went on, until the twelfth, from which she saw everything above the earth and under the earth, and nothing at all could be kept secret from her. moreover, as she was haughty, and would be subject to no one, but wished to keep the dominion for herself alone, she caused it to be proclaimed that no one should ever be her husband who could not conceal himself from her so effectually, that it should be quite impossible for her to find him. he who tried this, however, and was discovered by her, was to have his head struck off, and stuck on a post. ninety-seven posts with the heads of dead men were already standing before the castle, and no one had come forward for a long time. the princess was delighted, and thought to herself, “now i shall be free as long as i live.” then three brothers appeared before her, and announced to her that they were desirous of trying their luck.
the eldest believed he would be quite safe if he crept into a lime-pit, but she saw him from the first window, made him come out, and had his head cut off. the second crept into the cellar of the palace, but she perceived him also from the first window, and his fate was sealed. his head was placed on the nine and ninetieth post. then the youngest came to her and entreated her to give him a day for consideration, and also to be so gracious as to overlook it if she should happen to discover him twice, but if he failed the third time, he would look on his life as over. as he was so handsome, and begged so earnestly, she said, “yes, i will grant thee that, but thou wilt not succeed.”
next day he meditated for a long time how he should hide himself, but all in vain. then he seized his gun and went out hunting. he saw a raven, took a good aim at him, and was just going to fire, when the bird cried, “don’t shoot; i will make it worth thy while not.” he put his gun down, went on, and came to a lake where he surprised a large fish which had come up from the depths below to the surface of the water. when he had aimed at it, the fish cried, “don’t shoot, and i will make it worth thy while.” he allowed it to dive down again, went onwards, and met a fox which was lame. he fired and missed it, and the fox cried, “you had much better come here and draw the thorn out of my foot for me.” he did this; but then he wanted to kill the fox and skin it, the fox said, “stop, and i will make it worth thy while.” the youth let him go, and then as it was evening, returned home.
next day he was to hide himself; but howsoever much he puzzled his brains over it, he did not know where. he went into the forest to the raven and said, “i let thee live on, so now tell me where i am to hide myself, so that the king’s daughter shall not see me.” the raven hung his head and thought it over for a longtime. at length he croaked, “i have it.” he fetched an egg out of his nest, cut it into two parts, and shut the youth inside it; then made it whole again, and seated himself on it. when the king’s daughter went to the first window she could not discover him, nor could she from the others, and she began to be uneasy, but from the eleventh she saw him. she ordered the raven to be shot, and the egg to be brought and broken, and the youth was forced to come out. she said, “for once thou art excused, but if thou dost not do better than this, thou art lost!”
next day he went to the lake, called the fish to him and said, “i suffered thee to live, now tell me where to hide myself so that the king’s daughter may not see me.” the fish thought for a while, and at last cried, “i have it! i will shut thee up in my stomach.” he swallowed him, and went down to the bottom of the lake. the king’s daughter looked through her windows, and even from the eleventh did not see him, and was alarmed; but at length from the twelfth she saw him.
she ordered the fish to be caught and killed, and then the youth appeared. every one can imagine what a state of mind he was in. she said, “twice thou art forgiven, but be sure that thy head will be set on the hundredth post.”
on the last day, he went with a heavy heart into the country, and met the fox. “thou knowest how to find all kinds of hiding-places,” said he; “i let thee live, now advise me where i shall hide myself so that the king’s daughter shall not discover me.” “that’s a hard task,”
answered the fox, looking very thoughtful. at length he cried, “i have it!” and went with him to a spring, dipped himself in it, and came out as a stall-keeper in the market, and dealer in animals. the youth had to dip himself in the water also, and was changed into a small sea-hare. the merchant went into the town, and showed the pretty little animal, and many persons gathered together to see it. at length the king’s daughter came likewise, and as she liked it very much, she bought it, and gave the merchant a good deal of money for it. before he gave it over to her, he said to it, “when the king’s daughter goes to the window, creep quickly under the braids of her hair.” and now the time arrived when she was to search for him. she went to one window after another in turn, from the first to the eleventh, and did not see him. when she did not see him from the twelfth either, she was full of anxiety and anger, and shut it down with such violence that the glass in every window shivered into a thousand pieces, and the whole castle shook.
she went back and felt the sea-hare beneath the braids of her hair.
then she seized it, and threw it on the ground exclaiming, “away with thee, get out of my sight!” it ran to the merchant, and both of them hurried to the spring, wherein they plunged, and received back their true forms. the youth thanked the fox, and said, “the raven and the fish are idiots compared with thee; thou knowest the right tune to play, there is no denying that!”
the youth went straight to the palace. the princess was already expecting him, and accommodated herself to her destiny. the wedding was solemnized, and now he was king, and lord of all the kingdom. he never told her where he had concealed himself for the third time, and who had helped him, so she believed that he had done everything by his own skill, and she had a great respect for him, for she thought to herself, “he is able to do more than i.”
192 the master-thief
one day an old man and his wife were sitting in front of a miserable house resting a while from their work. suddenly a splendid carriage with four black horses came driving up, and a richly-dressed man descended from it. the peasant stood up, went to the great man, and asked what he wanted, and in what way he could be useful to him? the stranger stretched out his hand to the old man, and said, “i want nothing but to enjoy for once a country dish; cook me some potatoes, in the way you always have them, and then i will sit down at your table and eat them with pleasure.” the peasant smiled and said, “you are a count or a prince, or perhaps even a duke; noble gentlemen often have such fancies, but you shall have your wish.” the wife went into the kitchen, and began to wash and rub the potatoes, and to make them into balls, as they are eaten by the country-folks. whilst she was busy with this work, the peasant said to the stranger, “come into my garden with me for a while, i have still something to do there.” he had dug some holes in the garden, and now wanted to plant some trees in them. “have you no children,” asked the stranger, “who could help you with your work?” “no,” answered the peasant, “i had a son, it is true, but it is long since he went out into the world. he was a ne’er-do-well; sharp, and knowing, but he would learn nothing and was full of bad tricks, at last he ran away from me, and since then i have heard nothing of him.”
the old man took a young tree, put it in a hole, drove in a post beside it, and when he had shovelled in some earth and had trampled it firmly down, he tied the stem of the tree above, below, and in the middle, fast to the post by a rope of straw. “but tell me,” said the stranger, “why you don’t tie that crooked knotted tree, which is lying in the corner there, bent down almost to the ground, to a post also that it may grow straight, as well as these?” the old man smiled and said, “sir, you speak according to your knowledge, it is easy to see that you are not familiar with gardening. that tree there is old, and mis-shapen, no one can make it straight now. trees must be trained while they are young.” “that is how it was with your son,” said the stranger, “if you had trained him while he was still young, he would not have run away; now he too must have grown hard and mis-shapen.”
“truly it is a long time since he went away,” replied the old man, “he must have changed.” “would you know him again if he were to come to you?” asked the stranger. “hardly by his face,” replied the peasant, “but he has a mark about him, a birth-mark on his shoulder, that looks like a bean.” when he had said that the stranger pulled off his coat, bared his shoulder, and showed the peasant the bean. “good god!” cried the old man, “thou art really my son!” and love for his child stirred in his heart. “but,” he added, “how canst thou be my son, thou hast become a great lord and livest in wealth and luxury? how hast thou contrived to do that?” “ah, father,” answered the son, “the young tree was bound to no post and has grown crooked, now it is too old, it will never be straight again. how have i got all that? i have become a thief, but do not be alarmed, i am a master-thief. for me there are neither locks nor bolts, whatsoever i desire is mine. do not imagine that i steal like a common thief, i only take some of the superfluity of the rich. poor people are safe, i would rather give to them than take anything from them. it is the same with anything which i can have without trouble, cunning and dexterity i never touch it.” “alas, my son,” said the father, “it still does not please me, a thief is still a thief, i tell thee it will end badly.” he took him to his mother, and when she heard that was her son, she wept for joy, but when he told her that he had become a master-thief, two streams flowed down over her face. at length she said, “even if he has become a thief, he is still my son, and my eyes have beheld him once more.” they sat down to table, and once again he ate with his parents the wretched food which he had not eaten for so long. the father said, “if our lord, the count up there in the castle, learns who thou art, and what trade thou followest, he will not take thee in his arms and cradle thee in them as he did when he held thee at the font, but will cause thee to swing from a halter.” “be easy, father, he will do me no harm, for i understand my trade. i will go to him myself this very day.” when evening drew near, the master-thief seated himself in his carriage, and drove to the castle. the count received him civilly, for he took him for a distinguished man. when, however, the stranger made himself known, the count turned pale and was quite silent for some time. at length he said, “thou art my godson, and on that account mercy shall take the place of justice, and i will deal leniently with thee. since thou pridest thyself on being a master-thief, i will put thy art to the proof, but if thou dost not stand the test, thou must marry the rope-maker’s daughter, and the croaking of the raven must be thy music on the occasion.” “lord count,” answered the master-thief, “think of three things, as difficult as you like, and if i do not perform your tasks, do with me what you will.” the count reflected for some minutes, and then said, “well, then, in the first place, thou shalt steal the horse i keep for my own riding, out of the stable; in the next, thou shalt steal the sheet from beneath the bodies of my wife and myself when we are asleep, without our observing it, and the wedding-ring of my wife as well; thirdly and lastly, thou shalt steal away out of the church, the parson and clerk. mark what i am saying, for thy life depends on it.”
the master-thief went to the nearest town; there he bought the clothes of an old peasant woman, and put them on. then he stained his face brown, and painted wrinkles on it as well, so that no one could have recognized him. then he filled a small cask with old hungary wine in which was mixed a powerful sleeping-drink. he put the cask in a basket, which he took on his back, and walked with slow and tottering steps to the count’s castle. it was already dark when he arrived. he sat down on a stone in the court-yard and began to cough, like an asthmatic old woman, and to rub his hands as if he were cold. in front of the door of the stable some soldiers were lying round a fire; one of them observed the woman, and called out to her, “come nearer, old mother, and warm thyself beside us. after all, thou hast no bed for the night, and must take one where thou canst find it.” the old woman tottered up to them, begged them to lift the basket from her back, and sat down beside them at the fire. “what hast thou got in thy little cask, old lady?” asked one. “a good mouthful of wine,” she answered. “i live by trade, for money and fair words i am quite ready to let you have a glass.” “let us have it here, then,” said the soldier, and when he had tasted one glass he said, “when wine is good, i like another glass,” and had another poured out for himself, and the rest followed his example. “hallo, comrades,” cried one of them to those who were in the stable, “here is an old goody who has wine that is as old as herself; take a draught, it will warm your stomachs far better than our fire.” the old woman carried her cask into the stable. one of the soldiers had seated himself on the saddled riding-horse, another held its bridle in his hand, a third had laid hold of its tail. she poured out as much as they wanted until the spring ran dry. it was not long before the bridle fell from the hand of the one, and he fell down and began to snore, the other left hold of the tail, lay down and snored still louder. the one who was sitting in the saddle, did remain sitting, but bent his head almost down to the horse’s neck, and slept and blew with his mouth like the bellows of a forge. the soldiers outside had already been asleep for a long time, and were lying on the ground motionless, as if dead.
when the master-thief saw that he had succeeded, he gave the first a rope in his hand instead of the bridle, and the other who had been holding the tail, a wisp of straw, but what was he to do with the one who was sitting on the horse’s back? he did not want to throw him down, for he might have awakened and have uttered a cry. he had a good idea, he unbuckled the girths of the saddle, tied a couple of ropes which were hanging to a ring on the wall fast to the saddle, and drew the sleeping rider up into the air on it, then he twisted the rope round the posts, and made it fast. he soon unloosed the horse from the chain, but if he had ridden over the stony pavement of the yard they would have heard the noise in the castle. so he wrapped the horse’s hoofs in old rags, led him carefully out, leapt upon him, and galloped off.
when day broke, the master galloped to the castle on the stolen horse.
the count had just got up, and was looking out of the window. “good morning, sir count,” he cried to him, “here is the horse, which i have got safely out of the stable! just look, how beautifully your soldiers are lying there sleeping; and if you will but go into the stable, you will see how comfortable your watchers have made it for themselves.”
the count could not help laughing, then he said, “for once thou hast succeeded, but things won’t go so well the second time, and i warn thee that if thou comest before me as a thief, i will handle thee as i would a thief.” when the countess went to bed that night, she closed her hand with the wedding-ring tightly together, and the count said, “all the doors are locked and bolted, i will keep awake and wait for the thief, but if he gets in by the window, i will shoot him.” the master-thief, however, went in the dark to the gallows, cut a poor sinner who was hanging there down from the halter, and carried him on his back to the castle. then he set a ladder up to the bedroom, put the dead body on his shoulders, and began to climb up. when he had got so high that the head of the dead man showed at the window, the count, who was watching in his bed, fired a pistol at him, and immediately the master let the poor sinner fall down, and hid himself in one corner. the night was sufficiently lighted by the moon, for the master to see distinctly how the count got out of the window on to the ladder, came down, carried the dead body into the garden, and began to dig a hole in which to lay it. “now,” thought the thief, “the favourable moment has come,” stole nimbly out of his corner, and climbed up the ladder straight into the countess’s bedroom. “dear wife,” he began in the count’s voice, “the thief is dead, but, after all, he is my godson, and has been more of a scape-grace than a villain. i will not put him to open shame; besides, i am sorry for the parents. i will bury him myself before daybreak, in the garden that the thing may not be known, so give me the sheet, i will wrap up the body in it, and bury him as a dog burries things by scratching.” the countess gave him the sheet. “i tell you what,”
continued the thief, “i have a fit of magnanimity on me, give me the ring too,—the unhappy man risked his life for it, so he may take it with him into his grave.” she would not gainsay the count, and although she did it unwillingly she drew the ring from her finger, and gave it to him. the thief made off with both these things, and reached home safely before the count in the garden had finished his work of burying.
what a long face the count did pull when the master came next morning, and brought him the sheet and the ring. “art thou a wizard?” said he, “who has fetched thee out of the grave in which i myself laid thee, and brought thee to life again?” “you did not bury me,” said the thief, “but the poor sinner on the gallows,” and he told him exactly how everything had happened, and the count was forced to own to him that he was a clever, crafty thief. “but thou hast not reached the end yet,” he added, “thou hast still to perform the third task, and if thou dost not succeed in that, all is of no use.” the master smiled and returned no answer. when night had fallen he went with a long sack on his back, a bundle under his arms, and a lantern in his hand to the village-church.
in the sack he had some crabs, and in the bundle short wax-candles. he sat down in the churchyard, took out a crab, and stuck a wax-candle on his back. then he lighted the little light, put the crab on the ground, and let it creep about. he took a second out of the sack, and treated it in the same way, and so on until the last was out of the sack.
hereupon he put on a long black garment that looked like a monk’s cowl, and stuck a gray beard on his chin. when at last he was quite unrecognizable, he took the sack in which the crabs had been, went into the church, and ascended the pulpit. the clock in the tower was just striking twelve; when the last stroke had sounded, he cried with a loud and piercing voice, “hearken, sinful men, the end of all things has come! the last day is at hand! hearken! hearken! whosoever wishes to go to heaven with me must creep into the sack. i am peter, who opens and shuts the gate of heaven. behold how the dead outside there in the churchyard, are wandering about collecting their bones. come, come, and creep into the sack; the world is about to be destroyed!” the cry echoed through the whole village. the parson and clerk who lived nearest to the church, heard it first, and when they saw the lights which were moving about the churchyard, they observed that something unusual was going on, and went into the church. they listened to the sermon for a while, and then the clerk nudged the parson and said, “it would not be amiss if we were to use the opportunity together, and before the dawning of the last day, find an easy way of getting to heaven.” “to tell the truth,” answered the parson, “that is what i myself have been thinking, so if you are inclined, we will set out on our way.” “yes,” answered the clerk, “but you, the pastor, have the precedence, i will follow.” so the parson went first, and ascended the pulpit where the master opened his sack. the parson crept in first, and then the clerk. the master immediately tied up the sack tightly, seized it by the middle, and dragged it down the pulpit-steps, and whenever the heads of the two fools bumped against the steps, he cried, “we are going over the mountains.” then he drew them through the village in the same way, and when they were passing through puddles, he cried, “now we are going through wet clouds.” and when at last he was dragging them up the steps of the castle, he cried, “now we are on the steps of heaven, and will soon be in the outer court.” when he had got to the top, he pushed the sack into the pigeon-house, and when the pigeons fluttered about, he said, “hark how glad the angels are, and how they are flapping their wings!” then he bolted the door upon them, and went away.
next morning he went to the count, and told him that he had performed the third task also, and had carried the parson and clerk out of the church. “where hast thou left them?” asked the lord. “they are lying upstairs in a sack in the pigeon-house, and imagine that they are in heaven.” the count went up himself, and convinced himself that the master had told the truth. when he had delivered the parson and clerk from their captivity, he said, “thou art an arch-thief, and hast won thy wager. for once thou escapest with a whole skin, but see that thou leavest my land, for if ever thou settest foot on it again, thou may’st count on thy elevation to the gallows.” the arch-thief took leave of his parents, once more went forth into the wide world, and no one has ever heard of him since.
193 the drummer
a young drummer went out quite alone one evening into the country, and came to a lake on the shore of which he perceived three pieces of white linen lying. “what fine linen,” said he, and put one piece in his pocket. he returned home, thought no more of what he had found, and went to bed. just as he was going to sleep, it seemed to him as if some one was saying his name. he listened, and was aware of a soft voice which cried to him, “drummer, drummer, wake up!” as it was a dark night he could see no one, but it appeared to him that a figure was hovering about his bed. “what do you want?” he asked. “give me back my dress,”
answered the voice, “that you took away from me last evening by the lake.” “you shall have it back again,” said the drummer, “if you will tell me who you are.” “ah,” replied the voice, “i am the daughter of a mighty king; but i have fallen into the power of a witch, and am shut up on the glass-mountain. i have to bathe in the lake every day with my two sisters, but i cannot fly back again without my dress. my sisters have gone away, but i have been forced to stay behind. i entreat you to give me my dress back.” “be easy, poor child,” said the drummer. “i will willingly give it back to you.” he took it out of his pocket, and reached it to her in the dark. she snatched it in haste, and wanted to go away with it. “stop a moment, perhaps i can help you.” “you can only help me by ascending the glass-mountain, and freeing me from the power of the witch. but you cannot come to the glass-mountain, and indeed if you were quite close to it you could not ascend it.” “when i want to do a thing i always can do it,” said the drummer; “i am sorry for you, and have no fear of anything. but i do not know the way which leads to the glass-mountain.” “the road goes through the great forest, in which the man-eaters live,” she answered, “and more than that, i dare not tell you.” and then he heard her wings quiver, as she flew away.
by daybreak the drummer arose, buckled on his drum, and went without fear straight into the forest. after he had walked for a while without seeing any giants, he thought to himself, “i must waken up the sluggards,” and he hung his drum before him, and beat such a reveille that the birds flew out of the trees with loud cries. it was not long before a giant who had been lying sleeping among the grass, rose up, and was as tall as a fir-tree. “wretch!” cried he; “what art thou drumming here for, and wakening me out of my best sleep?” “i am drumming,” he replied, “because i want to show the way to many thousands who are following me.” “what do they want in my forest?”
demanded the giant. “they want to put an end to thee, and cleanse the forest of such a monster as thou art!” “oho!” said the giant, “i will trample you all to death like so many ants.” “dost thou think thou canst do anything against us?” said the drummer; “if thou stoopest to take hold of one, he will jump away and hide himself; but when thou art lying down and sleeping, they will come forth from every thicket, and creep up to thee. every one of them has a hammer of steel in his belt, and with that they will beat in thy skull.” the giant grew angry and thought, “if i meddle with the crafty folk, it might turn out badly for me. i can strangle wolves and bears, but i cannot protect myself from these earth-worms.” “listen, little fellow,” said he; “go back again, and i will promise you that for the future i will leave you and your comrades in peace, and if there is anything else you wish for, tell me, for i am quite willing to do something to please you.” “thou hast long legs,” said the drummer, “and canst run quicker than i; carry me to the glass-mountain, and i will give my followers a signal to go back, and they shall leave thee in peace this time.” “come here, worm,” said the giant; “seat thyself on my shoulder, i will carry thee where thou wishest to be.” the giant lifted him up, and the drummer began to beat his drum up aloft to his heart’s delight. the giant thought, “that is the signal for the other people to turn back.”
after a while, a second giant was standing in the road, who took the drummer from the first, and stuck him in his button-hole. the drummer laid hold of the button, which was as large as a dish, held on by it, and looked merrily around. then they came to a third giant, who took him out of the button-hole, and set him on the rim of his hat. then the drummer walked backwards and forwards up above, and looked over the trees, and when he perceived a mountain in the blue distance, he thought, “that must be the glass-mountain,” and so it was. the giant only made two steps more, and they reached the foot of the mountain, where the giant put him down. the drummer demanded to be put on the summit of the glass-mountain, but the giant shook his head, growled something in his beard, and went back into the forest.
and now the poor drummer was standing before the mountain, which was as high as if three mountains were piled on each other, and at the same time as smooth as a looking-glass, and did not know how to get up it.
he began to climb, but that was useless, for he always slipped back again. “if one was a bird now,” thought he; but what was the good of wishing, no wings grew for him.
whilst he was standing thus, not knowing what to do, he saw, not far from him, two men who were struggling fiercely together. he went up to them and saw that they were disputing about a saddle which was lying on the ground before them, and which both of them wanted to have. “what fools you are,” said he, “to quarrel about a saddle, when you have not a horse for it!” “the saddle is worth fighting about,” answered one of the men; “whosoever sits on it, and wishes himself in any place, even if it should be the very end of the earth, gets there the instant he has uttered the wish. the saddle belongs to us in common. it is my turn to ride on it, but that other man will not let me do it.” “i will soon decide the quarrel,” said the drummer, and he went to a short distance and stuck a white rod in the ground. then he came back and said, “now run to the goal, and whoever gets there first, shall ride first.” both put themselves into a trot; but hardly had they gone a couple of steps before the drummer swung himself on the saddle, wished himself on the glass-mountain, and before any one could turn round, he was there. on the top of the mountain was a plain; there stood an old stone house, and in front of the house lay a great fish-pond, but behind it was a dark forest. he saw neither men nor animals, everything was quiet; only the wind rustled amongst the trees, and the clouds moved by quite close above his head. he went to the door and knocked. when he had knocked for the third time, an old woman with a brown face and red eyes opened the door. she had spectacles on her long nose, and looked sharply at him; then she asked what he wanted. “entrance, food, and a bed for the night,” replied the drummer. “that thou shalt have,” said the old woman, “if thou wilt perform three services in return.” “why not?” he answered, “i am not afraid of any kind of work, however hard it may be.” the old woman let him go in, and gave him some food and a good bed at night. the next morning when he had had his sleep out, she took a thimble from her wrinkled finger, reached it to the drummer, and said, “go to work now, and empty out the pond with this thimble; but thou must have it done before night, and must have sought out all the fishes which are in the water and laid them side by side, according to their kind and size.” “that is strange work,” said the drummer, but he went to the pond, and began to empty it. he baled the whole morning; but what can any one do to a great lake with a thimble, even if he were to bale for a thousand years?
when it was noon, he thought, “it is all useless, and whether i work or not it will come to the same thing.” so he gave it up and sat down.
then came a maiden out of the house who set a little basket with food before him, and said, “what ails thee, that thou sittest so sadly here?” he looked at her, and saw that she was wondrously beautiful.
“ah,” said he, “i cannot finish the first piece of work, how will it be with the others? i came forth to seek a king’s daughter who is said to dwell here, but i have not found her, and i will go farther.” “stay here,” said the maiden, “i will help thee out of thy difficulty. thou art tired, lay thy head in my lap, and sleep. when thou awakest again, thy work will be done.” the drummer did not need to be told that twice.
as soon as his eyes were shut, she turned a wishing-ring and said, “rise, water. fishes, come out.” instantly the water rose on high like a white mist, and moved away with the other clouds, and the fishes sprang on the shore and laid themselves side by side each according to his size and kind. when the drummer awoke, he saw with amazement that all was done. but the maiden said, “one of the fish is not lying with those of its own kind, but quite alone; when the old woman comes to-night and sees that all she demanded has been done, she will ask thee, ‘what is this fish lying alone for?’ then throw the fish in her face, and say, ‘this one shall be for thee, old witch.’” in the evening the witch came, and when she had put this question, he threw the fish in her face. she behaved as if she did not remark it, and said nothing, but looked at him with malicious eyes. next morning she said, “yesterday it was too easy for thee, i must give thee harder work.
to-day thou must hew down the whole of the forest, split the wood into logs, and pile them up, and everything must be finished by the evening.” she gave him an axe, a mallet, and two wedges. but the axe was made of lead, and the mallet and wedges were of tin. when he began to cut, the edge of the axe turned back, and the mallet and wedges were beaten out of shape. he did not know how to manage, but at mid-day the maiden came once more with his dinner and comforted him. “lay thy head on my lap,” said she, “and sleep; when thou awakest, thy work will be done.” she turned her wishing-ring, and in an instant the whole forest fell down with a crash, the wood split, and arranged itself in heaps, and it seemed just as if unseen giants were finishing the work. when he awoke, the maiden said, “dost thou see that the wood is piled up and arranged, one bough alone remains; but when the old woman comes this evening and asks thee about that bough, give her a blow with it, and say, ‘that is for thee, thou witch.’”
the old woman came, “there thou seest how easy the work was!” said she; “but for whom hast thou left that bough which is lying there still?”
“for thee, thou witch,” he replied, and gave her a blow with it. but she pretended not to feel it, laughed scornfully, and said, “early to-morrow morning thou shalt arrange all the wood in one heap, set fire to it, and burn it.” he rose at break of day, and began to pick up the wood, but how can a single man get a whole forest together? the work made no progress. the maiden, however, did not desert him in his need.
she brought him his food at noon, and when he had eaten, he laid his head on her lap, and went to sleep. when he awoke, the entire pile of wood was burning in one enormous flame, which stretched its tongues out into the sky. “listen to me,” said the maiden, “when the witch comes, she will give thee all kinds of orders; do whatever she asks thee without fear, and then she will not be able to get the better of thee, but if thou art afraid, the fire will lay hold of thee, and consume thee. at last when thou hast done everything, seize her with both thy hands, and throw her into the midst of the fire.” the maiden departed, and the old woman came sneaking up to him. “oh, i am cold,” said she, “but that is a fire that burns; it warms my old bones for me, and does me good! but there is a log lying there which won’t burn, bring it out for me. when thou hast done that, thou art free, and mayst go where thou likest, come; go in with a good will.”
the drummer did not reflect long; he sprang into the midst of the flames, but they did not hurt him, and could not even singe a hair of his head. he carried the log out, and laid it down. hardly, however, had the wood touched the earth than it was transformed, and the beautiful maiden who had helped him in his need stood before him, and by the silken and shining golden garments which she wore, he knew right well that she was the king’s daughter. but the old woman laughed venomously, and said, “thou thinkest thou hast her safe, but thou hast not got her yet!” just as she was about to fall on the maiden and take her away, the youth seized the old woman with both his hands, raised her up on high, and threw her into the jaws of the fire, which closed over her as if it were delighted that an old witch was to be burnt.
then the king’s daughter looked at the drummer, and when she saw that he was a handsome youth and remembered how he had risked his life to deliver her, she gave him her hand, and said, “thou hast ventured everything for my sake, but i also will do everything for thine.
promise to be true to me, and thou shalt be my husband. we shall not want for riches, we shall have enough with what the witch has gathered together here.” she led him into the house, where there were chests and coffers crammed with the old woman’s treasures. the maiden left the gold and silver where it was, and took only the precious stones. she would not stay any longer on the glass-mountain, so the drummer said to her, “seat thyself by me on my saddle, and then we will fly down like birds.” “i do not like the old saddle,” said she, “i need only turn my wishing-ring and we shall be at home.” “very well, then,” answered the drummer, “then wish us in front of the town-gate.” in the twinkling of an eye they were there, but the drummer said, “i will just go to my parents and tell them the news, wait for me outside here, i shall soon be back.” “ah,” said the king’s daughter, “i beg thee to be careful. on thy arrival do not kiss thy parents on the right cheek, or else thou wilt forget everything, and i shall stay behind here outside, alone and deserted.” “how can i forget thee?” said he, and promised her to come back very soon, and gave his hand upon it. when he went into his father’s house, he had changed so much that no one knew who he was, for the three days which he had passed on the glass-mountain had been three years. then he made himself known, and his parents fell on his neck with joy, and his heart was so moved that he forgot what the maiden had said, and kissed them on both cheeks. but when he had given them the kiss on the right cheek, every thought of the king’s daughter vanished from him. he emptied out his pockets, and laid handfuls of the largest jewels on the table. the parents had not the least idea what to do with the riches. then the father built a magnificent castle all surrounded by gardens, woods, and meadows as if a prince were going to live in it, and when it was ready, the mother said, “i have found a maiden for thee, and the wedding shall be in three days. the son was content to do as his parents desired.”
the poor king’s daughter had stood for a long time without the town waiting for the return of the young man. when evening came, she said, “he must certainly have kissed his parents on the right cheek, and has forgotten me.” her heart was full of sorrow, she wished herself into a solitary little hut in a forest, and would not return to her father’s court. every evening she went into the town and passed the young man’s house; he often saw her, but he no longer knew her. at length she heard the people saying, “the wedding will take place to-morrow.” then she said, “i will try if i can win his heart back.”
on the first day of the wedding ceremonies, she turned her wishing-ring, and said, “a dress as bright as the sun.” instantly the dress lay before her, and it was as bright as if it had been woven of real sunbeams. when all the guests were assembled, she entered the hall. every one was amazed at the beautiful dress, and the bride most of all, and as pretty dresses were the things she had most delight in, she went to the stranger and asked if she would sell it to her. “not for money,” she answered, “but if i may pass the first night outside the door of the room where your betrothed sleeps, i will give it up to you.” the bride could not overcome her desire and consented, but she mixed a sleeping-draught with the wine her betrothed took at night, which made him fall into a deep sleep, when all had become quiet, the king’s daughter crouched down by the door of the bedroom, opened it just a little, and cried,
“drummer, drummer, i pray thee hear!
hast thou forgotten thou heldest me dear?
that on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
that i rescued thy life from the witch’s power?
didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
drummer, drummer, hearken to me!”
but it was all in vain, the drummer did not awake, and when morning dawned, the king’s daughter was forced to go back again as she came. on the second evening she turned her wishing-ring and said, “a dress as silvery as the moon.” when she appeared at the feast in the dress which was as soft as moonbeams, it again excited the desire of the bride, and the king’s daughter gave it to her for permission to pass the second night also, outside the door of the bedroom. then in the stillness of the night, she cried,
“drummer, drummer, i pray thee hear!
hast thou forgotten thy heldest me dear?
that on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
that i rescued thy life from the witch’s power?
didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
drummer, drummer, hearken to me!”
but the drummer, who was stupefied with the sleeping-draught, could not be aroused. sadly next morning she went back to her hut in the forest.
but the people in the house had heard the lamentation of the stranger-maiden, and told the bridegroom about it. they told him also that it was impossible that he could hear anything of it, because the maiden he was going to marry had poured a sleeping-draught into his wine.
on the third evening, the king’s daughter turned her wishing-ring, and said, “a dress glittering like the stars.” when she showed herself therein at the feast, the bride was quite beside herself with the splendour of the dress, which far surpassed the others, and she said, “i must, and will have it.” the maiden gave it as she had given the others for permission to spend the night outside the bridegroom’s door.
the bridegroom, however, did not drink the wine which was handed to him before he went to bed, but poured it behind the bed, and when everything was quiet, he heard a sweet voice which called to him,
“drummer, drummer, i pray thee hear!
hast thou forgotten thou held me dear?
that on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour?
that i rescued thy life from the witch’s power?
didst thou not plight thy troth to me?
drummer, drummer, hearken to me!”
suddenly, his memory returned to him. “ah,” cried he, “how can i have acted so unfaithfully; but the kiss which in the joy of my heart i gave my parents, on the right cheek, that is to blame for it all, that is what stupefied me!” he sprang up, took the king’s daughter by the hand, and led her to his parents’ bed. “this is my true bride,” said he; “if i marry the other, i shall do a great wrong.” the parents, when they heard how everything had happened, gave their consent. then the lights in the hall were lighted again, drums and trumpets were brought, friends and relations were invited to come, and the real wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing. the first bride received the beautiful dresses as a compensation, and declared herself satisfied.
194 the ear of corn
in former times, when god himself still walked the earth, the fruitfulness of the soil was much greater than it is now; then the ears of corn did not bear fifty or sixty, but four or five hundred-fold.
then the corn grew from the bottom to the very top o f the stalk, and according to the length of the stalk was the length of the ear. men however are so made, that when they are too well off they no longer value the blessings which come from god, but grow indifferent and careless. one day a woman was passing by a corn-field when her little child, who was running beside her, fell into a puddle, and dirtied her frock. on this the mother tore up a handful of the beautiful ears of corn, and cleaned the frock with them.
when the lord, who just then came by, saw that, he was angry, and said, “henceforth shall the stalks of corn bear no more ears; men are no longer worthy of heavenly gifts.” the by-standers who heard this, were terrified, and fell on their knees and prayed that he would still leave something on the stalks, even if the people were undeserving of it, for the sake of the innocent birds which would otherwise have to starve.
the lord, who foresaw their suffering, had pity on them, and granted the request. so the ears were left as they now grow.
195 the grave-mound
a rich farmer was one day standing in his yard inspecting his fields and gardens. the corn was growing up vigorously and the fruit-trees were heavily laden with fruit. the grain of the year before still lay in such immense heaps on the floors that the rafters could hardly bear it. then he went into the stable, where were well-fed oxen, fat cows, and horses bright as looking-glass. at length he went back into his sitting-room, and cast a glance at the iron chest in which his money lay.
whilst he was thus standing surveying his riches, all at once there was a loud knock close by him. the knock was not at the door of his room, but at the door of his heart. it opened, and he heard a voice which said to him, “hast thou done good to thy family with it? hast thou considered the necessities of the poor? hast thou shared thy bread with the hungry? hast thou been contented with what thou hast, or didst thou always desire to have more?” the heart was not slow in answering, “i have been hard and pitiless, and have never shown any kindness to my own family. if a beggar came, i turned away my eyes from him. i have not troubled myself about god, but have thought only of increasing my wealth. if everything which the sky covers had been mine own, i should still not have had enough.”
when he was aware of this answer he was greatly alarmed, his knees began to tremble, and he was forced to sit down.
then there was another knock, but the knock was at the door of his room. it was his neighbour, a poor man who had a number of children whom he could no longer satisfy with food. “i know,” thought the poor man, “that my neighbour is rich, but he is as hard as he is rich. i don’t believe he will help me, but my children are crying for bread, so i will venture it.” he said to the rich man, “you do not readily give away anything that is yours, but i stand here like one who feels the water rising above his head. my children are starving, lend me four measures* of corn.” the rich man looked at him long, and then the first sunbeam of mercy began to melt away a drop of the ice of greediness. “i will not lend thee four measures,” he answered, “but i will make thee a present of eight, but thou must fulfil one condition.” “what am i to do?” said the poor man. “when i am dead, thou shalt watch for three nights by my grave.” the peasant was disturbed in his mind at this request, but in the need in which he was, he would have consented to anything; he accepted, therefore, and carried the corn home with him.
it seemed as if the rich man had foreseen what was about to happen, for when three days were gone by, he suddenly dropped down dead. no one knew exactly how it came to pass, but no one grieved for him. when he was buried, the poor man remembered his promise; he would willingly have been released from it, but he thought, “after all, he acted kindly by me. i have fed my hungry children with his corn, and even if that were not the case, where i have once given my promise i must keep it.”
at nightfall he went into the churchyard, and seated himself on the grave-mound. everything was quiet, only the moon appeared above the grave, and frequently an owl flew past and uttered her melancholy cry.
when the sun rose, the poor man betook himself in safety to his home, and in the same manner the second night passed quietly by. on the evening of the third day he felt a strange uneasiness, it seemed to him that something was about to happen. when he went out he saw, by the churchyard-wall, a man whom he had never seen before. he was no longer young, had scars on his face, and his eyes looked sharply and eagerly around. he was entirely covered with an old cloak, and nothing was visible but his great riding-boots. “what are you looking for here?”
the peasant asked. “are you not afraid of the lonely churchyard?”
“i am looking for nothing,” he answered, “and i am afraid of nothing! i am like the youngster who went forth to learn how to shiver, and had his labour for his pains, but got the king’s daughter to wife and great wealth with her, only i have remained poor. i am nothing but a paid-off soldier, and i mean to pass the night here, because i have no other shelter.” “if you are without fear,” said the peasant, “stay with me, and help me to watch that grave there.”
“to keep watch is a soldier’s business,” he replied, “whatever we fall in with here, whether it be good or bad, we will share it between us.”
the peasant agreed to this, and they seated themselves on the grave together.
all was quiet until midnight, when suddenly a shrill whistling was heard in the air, and the two watchers perceived the evil one standing bodily before them. “be off, you ragamuffins!” cried he to them, “the man who lies in that grave belongs to me; i want to take him, and if you don’t go away i will wring your necks!” “sir with the red feather,”
said the soldier, “you are not my captain, i have no need to obey you, and i have not yet learned how to fear. go away, we shall stay sitting here.”
the devil thought to himself, “money is the best thing with which to get hold of these two vagabonds.” so he began to play a softer tune, and asked quite kindly, if they would not accept a bag of money, and go home with it? “that is worth listening to,” answered the soldier, “but one bag of gold won’t serve us, if you will give as much as will go into one of my boots, we will quit the field for you and go away.”
“i have not so much as that about me,” said the devil, “but i will fetch it. in the neighbouring town lives a money-changer who is a good friend of mine, and will readily advance it to me.” when the devil had vanished the soldier took his left boot off, and said, “we will soon pull the charcoal-burner’s nose for him, just give me your knife, comrade.” he cut the sole off the boot, and put it in the high grass near the grave on the edge of a hole that was half over-grown. “that will do,” said he; “now the chimney-sweep may come.”
they both sat down and waited, and it was not long before the devil returned with a small bag of gold in his hand. “just pour it in,” said the soldier, raising up the boot a little, “but that won’t be enough.”
the black one shook out all that was in the bag; the gold fell through, and the boot remained empty. “stupid devil,” cried the soldier, “it won’t do! didn’t i say so at once? go back again, and bring more.” the devil shook his head, went, and in an hour’s time came with a much larger bag under his arm. “now pour it in,” cried the soldier, “but i doubt the boot won’t be full.” the gold clinked as it fell, but the boot remained empty. the devil looked in himself with his burning eyes, and convinced himself of the truth. “you have shamefully big calves to your legs!” cried he, and made a wry face. “did you think,” replied the soldier, “that i had a cloven foot like you? since when have you been so stingy? see that you get more gold together, or our bargain will come to nothing!” the wicked one went off again. this time he stayed away longer, and when at length he appeared he was panting under the weight of a sack which lay on his shoulders. he emptied it into the boot, which was just as far from being filled as before. he became furious, and was just going to tear the boot out of the soldier’s hands, but at that moment the first ray of the rising sun broke forth from the sky, and the evil spirit fled away with loud shrieks. the poor soul was saved.
the peasant wished to divide the gold, but the soldier said, “give what falls to my lot to the poor, i will come with thee to thy cottage, and together we will live in rest and peace on what remains, as long as god is pleased to permit.”
196 old rinkrank
there was once on a time a king who had a daughter, and he caused a glass mountain to be made, and said that whosoever could cross to the other side of it without falling should have his daughter to wife. then there was one who loved the king’s daughter, and he asked the king if he might have her. “yes,” said the king; “if you can cross the mountain without falling, you shall have her.” and the princess said she would go over it with him, and would hold him if he were about to fall. so they set out together to go over it, and when they were half way up the princess slipped and fell, and the glass-mountain opened and shut her up inside it, and her betrothed could not see where she had gone, for the mountain closed immediately. then he wept and lamented much, and the king was miserable too, and had the mountain broken open where she had been lost, and though the would be able to get her out again, but they could not find the place into which she had fallen. meanwhile the king’s daughter had fallen quite deep down into the earth into a great cave. an old fellow with a very long gray beard came to meet her, and told her that if she would be his servant and do everything he bade her, she might live, if not he would kill her. so she did all he bade her. in the mornings he took his ladder out of his pocket, and set it up against the mountain and climbed to the top by its help, and then he drew up the ladder after him. the princess had to cook his dinner, make his bed, and do all his work, and when he came home again he always brought with him a heap of gold and silver. when she had lived with him for many years, and had grown quite old, he called her mother mansrot, and she had to call him old rinkrank. then once when he was out, and she had made his bed and washed his dishes, she shut the doors and windows all fast, and there was one little window through which the light shone in, and this she left open. when old rinkrank came home, he knocked at his door, and cried, “mother mansrot, open the door for me.”
“no,” said she, “old rinkrank, i will not open the door for thee.” then he said,
“here stand i, poor rinkrank, on my seventeen long shanks, on my weary, worn-out foot, wash my dishes, mother mansrot.”
“i have washed thy dishes already,” said she. then again he said,
“here stand i, poor rinkrank, on my seventeen long shanks, on my weary, worn-out foot, make me my bed, mother mansrot.”
“i have made thy bed already,” said she. then again he said,
“here stand i, poor rinkrank, on my seventeen long shanks, on my weary, worn-out foot, open the door, mother mansrot.”
then he ran all round his house, and saw that the little window was open, and thought, “i will look in and see what she can be about, and why she will not open the door for me.” he tried to peep in, but could not get his head through because of his long beard. so he first put his beard through the open window, but just as he had got it through, mother mansrot came by and pulled the window down with a cord which she had tied to it, and his beard was shut fast in it. then he began to cry most piteously, for it hurt him very much, and to entreat her to release him again. but she said not until he gave her the ladder with which he ascended the mountain. then, whether he would or not, he had to tell her where the ladder was. and she fastened a very long ribbon to the window, and then she set up the ladder, and ascended the mountain, and when she was at the top of it she opened the window. she went to her father, and told him all that had happened to her. the king rejoiced greatly, and her betrothed was still there, and they went and dug up the mountain, and found old rinkrank inside it with all his gold and silver. then the king had old rinkrank put to death, and took all his gold and silver. the princess married her betrothed, and lived right happily in great magnificence and joy.
197 the crystal ball
there was once an enchantress, who had three sons who loved each other as brothers, but the old woman did not trust them, and thought they wanted to steal her power from her. so she changed the eldest into an eagle, which was forced to dwell in the rocky mountains, and was often seen sweeping in great circles in the sky. the second, she changed into a whale, which lived in the deep sea, and all that was seen of it was that it sometimes spouted up a great jet of water in the air. each of them only bore his human form for only two hours daily. the third son, who was afraid she might change him into a raging wild beast a bear perhaps, or a wolf, went secretly away. he had heard that a king’s daughter who was bewitched, was imprisoned in the castle of the golden sun, and was waiting for deliverance. those, however, who tried to free her risked their lives; three-and-twenty youths had already died a miserable death, and now only one other might make the attempt, after which no more must come. and as his heart was without fear, he caught at the idea of seeking out the castle of the golden sun. he had already travelled about for a long time without being able to find it, when he came by chance into a great forest, and did not know the way out of it.
all at once he saw in the distance two giants, who made a sign to him with their hands, and when he came to them they said, “we are quarrelling about a cap, and which of us it is to belong to, and as we are equally strong, neither of us can get the better of the other. the small men are cleverer than we are, so we will leave the decision to thee.” “how can you dispute about an old cap?” said the youth. “thou dost not know what properties it has! it is a wishing-cap; whosoever puts it on, can wish himself away wherever he likes, and in an instant he will be there.” “give me the cap,” said the youth, “i will go a short distance off, and when i call you, you must run a race, and the cap shall belong to the one who gets first to me.” he put it on and went away, and thought of the king’s daughter, forgot the giants, and walked continually onward. at length he sighed from the very bottom of his heart, and cried, “ah, if i were but at the castle of the golden sun,” and hardly had the words passed his lips than he was standing on a high mountain before the gate of the castle.
he entered and went through all the rooms, until in the last he found the king’s daughter. but how shocked he was when he saw her. she had an ashen-gray face full of wrinkles, blear eyes, and red hair. “are you the king’s daughter, whose beauty the whole world praises?” cried he.
“ah,” she answered, “this is not my form; human eyes can only see me in this state of ugliness, but that thou mayst know what i am like, look in the mirror it does not let itself be misled it will show thee my image as it is in truth.” she gave him the mirror in his hand, and he saw therein the likeness of the most beautiful maiden on earth, and saw, too, how the tears were rolling down her cheeks with grief. then said he, “how canst thou be set free? i fear no danger.” she said, “he who gets the crystal ball, and holds it before the enchanter, will destroy his power with it, and i shall resume my true shape. ah,” she added, “so many have already gone to meet death for this, and thou art so young; i grieve that thou shouldst encounter such great danger.”
“nothing can keep me from doing it,” said he, “but tell me what i must do.” “thou shalt know everything,” said the king’s daughter; “when thou descendest the mountain on which the castle stands, a wild bull will stand below by a spring, and thou must fight with it, and if thou hast the luck to kill it, a fiery bird will spring out of it, which bears in its body a burning egg, and in the egg the crystal ball lies like a yolk. the bird will not, however, let the egg fall until forced to do so, and if it falls on the ground, it will flame up and burn everything that is near, and melt even ice itself, and with it the crystal ball, and then all thy trouble will have been in vain.”
the youth went down to the spring, where the bull snorted and bellowed at him. after a long struggle he plunged his sword in the animal’s body, and it fell down. instantly a fiery bird arose from it, and was about to fly away, but the young man’s brother, the eagle, who was passing between the clouds, swooped down, hunted it away to the sea, and struck it with his beak until, in its extremity, it let the egg fall. the egg did not, however, fall into the sea, but on a fisherman’s hut which stood on the shore and the hut began at once to smoke and was about to break out in flames. then arose in the sea waves as high as a house, they streamed over the hut, and subdued the fire. the other brother, the whale, had come swimming to them, and had driven the water up on high. when the fire was extinguished, the youth sought for the egg and happily found it; it was not yet melted, but the shell was broken by being so suddenly cooled with the water, and he could take out the crystal ball unhurt.
when the youth went to the enchanter and held it before him, the latter said, “my power is destroyed, and from this time forth thou art the king of the castle of the golden sun. with this canst thou likewise give back to thy brothers their human form.” then the youth hastened to the king’s daughter, and when he entered the room, she was standing there in the full splendour of her beauty, and joyfully they exchanged rings with each other.
198 maid maleen
there was once a king who had a son who asked in marriage the daughter of a mighty king; she was called maid maleen, and was very beautiful.
as her father wished to give her to another, the prince was rejected; but as they both loved each other with all their hearts, they would not give each other up, and maid maleen said to her father, “i can and will take no other for my husband.” then the king flew into a passion, and ordered a dark tower to be built, into which no ray of sunlight or moonlight should enter. when it was finished, he said, “therein shalt thou be imprisoned for seven years, and then i will come and see if thy perverse spirit is broken.” meat and drink for the seven years were carried into the tower, and then she and her waiting-woman were led into it and walled up, and thus cut off from the sky and from the earth. there they sat in the darkness, and knew not when day or night began. the king’s son often went round and round the tower, and called their names, but no sound from without pierced through the thick walls.
what else could they do but lament and complain? meanwhile the time passed, and by the diminution of the food and drink they knew that the seven years were coming to an end. they thought the moment of their deliverance was come; but no stroke of the hammer was heard, no stone fell out of the wall, and it seemed to maid maleen that her father had forgotten her. as they only had food for a short time longer, and saw a miserable death awaiting them, maid maleen said, “we must try our last chance, and see if we can break through the wall.” she took the bread-knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, and when she was tired, the waiting-maid took her turn. with great labour they succeeded in getting out one stone, and then a second, and a third, and when three days were over the first ray of light fell on their darkness, and at last the opening was so large that they could look out. the sky was blue, and a fresh breeze played on their faces; but how melancholy everything looked all around! her father’s castle lay in ruins, the town and the villages were, so far as could be seen, destroyed by fire, the fields far and wide laid to waste, and no human being was visible. when the opening in the wall was large enough for them to slip through, the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then maid maleen followed. but where were they to go? the enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom, driven away the king, and slain all the inhabitants.
they wandered forth to seek another country, but nowhere did they find a shelter, or a human being to give them a mouthful of bread, and their need was so great that they were forced to appease their hunger with nettles. when, after long journeying, they came into another country, they tried to get work everywhere; but wherever they knocked they were turned away, and no one would have pity on them. at last they arrived in a large city and went to the royal palace. there also they were ordered to go away, but at last the cook said that they might stay in the kitchen and be scullions.
the son of the king in whose kingdom they were, was, however, the very man who had been betrothed to maid maleen. his father had chosen another bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her heart was wicked.
the wedding was fixed, and the maiden had already arrived; but because of her great ugliness, however, she shut herself in her room, and allowed no one to see her, and maid maleen had to take her her meals from the kitchen. when the day came for the bride and the bridegroom to go to church, she was ashamed of her ugliness, and afraid that if she showed herself in the streets, she would be mocked and laughed at by the people. then said she to maid maleen, “a great piece of luck has befallen thee. i have sprained my foot, and cannot well walk through the streets; thou shalt put on my wedding-clothes and take my place; a greater honour than that thou canst not have!” maid maleen, however, refused it, and said, “i wish for no honour which is not suitable for me.” it was in vain, too, that the bride offered her gold. at last she said angrily, “if thou dost not obey me, it shall cost thee thy life. i have but to speak the word, and thy head will lie at thy feet.” then she was forced to obey, and put on the bride’s magnificent clothes and all her jewels. when she entered the royal hall, every one was amazed at her great beauty, and the king said to his son, “this is the bride whom i have chosen for thee, and whom thou must lead to church.” the bridegroom was astonished, and thought, “she is like my maid maleen, and i should believe that it was she herself, but she has long been shut up in the tower, or dead.” he took her by the hand and led her to church. on the way was a nettle-plant, and she said,
“oh, nettle-plant, little nettle-plant, what dost thou here alone?
i have known the time when i ate thee unboiled, when i ate thee unroasted.”
“what art thou saying?” asked the king’s son. “nothing,” she replied, “i was only thinking of maid maleen.” he was surprised that she knew about her, but kept silence. when they came to the foot-plank into the churchyard, she said,
“foot-bridge, do not break, i am not the true bride.”
“what art thou saying there?” asked the king’s son. “nothing,” she replied, “i was only thinking of maid maleen.” “dost thou know maid maleen?” “no,” she answered, “how should i know her; i have only heard of her.” when they came to the church-door, she said once more,
“church-door, break not, i am not the true bride.”
“what art thou saying there?” asked he. “ah,” she answered, “i was only thinking of maid maleen.” then he took out a precious chain, put it round her neck, and fastened the clasp. thereupon they entered the church, and the priest joined their hands together before the altar, and married them. he led her home, but she did not speak a single word the whole way. when they got back to the royal palace, she hurried into the bride’s chamber, put off the magnificent clothes and the jewels, dressed herself in her gray gown, and kept nothing but the jewel on her neck, which she had received from the bridegroom.
when the night came, and the bride was to be led into the prince’s apartment, she let her veil fall over her face, that he might not observe the deception. as soon as every one had gone away, he said to her, “what didst thou say to the nettle-plant which was growing by the wayside?”
“to which nettle-plant?” asked she; “i don’t talk to nettle-plants.”
“if thou didst not do it, then thou art not the true bride,” said he.
so she bethought herself, and said,
“i must go out unto my maid, who keeps my thoughts for me.”
she went out and sought maid maleen. “girl, what hast thou been saying to the nettle?” “i said nothing but,
“oh, nettle-plant, little nettle-plant, what dost thou here alone?
i have known the time when i ate thee unboiled, when i ate thee unroasted.”
the bride ran back into the chamber, and said, “i know now what i said to the nettle,” and she repeated the words which she had just heard.
“but what didst thou say to the foot-bridge when we went over it?”
asked the king’s son. “to the foot-bridge?” she answered. “i don’t talk to foot-bridges.” “then thou art not the true bride.”
she again said,
“i must go out unto my maid, who keeps my thoughts for me,”
and ran out and found maid maleen, “girl, what didst thou say to the foot-bridge?”
“i said nothing but,
“foot-bridge, do not break, i am not the true bride.”
“that costs thee thy life!” cried the bride, but she hurried into the room, and said, “i know now what i said to the foot-bridge,” and she repeated the words. “but what didst thou say to the church-door?” “to the church-door?” she replied; “i don’t talk to church-doors.” “then thou art not the true bride.”
she went out and found maid maleen, and said, “girl, what didst thou say to the church-door?”
“i said nothing but,
“church-door, break not, i am not the true bride.”
“that will break thy neck for thee!” cried the bride, and flew into a terrible passion, but she hastened back into the room, and said, “i know now what i said to the church-door,” and she repeated the words.
“but where hast thou the jewel which i gave thee at the church-door?”
“what jewel?” she answered; “thou didst not give me any jewel.” “i myself put it round thy neck, and i myself fastened it; if thou dost not know that, thou art not the true bride.” he drew the veil from her face, and when he saw her immeasurable ugliness, he sprang back terrified, and said, “how comest thou here? who art thou?” “i am thy betrothed bride, but because i feared lest the people should mock me when they saw me out of doors, i commanded the scullery-maid to dress herself in my clothes, and to go to church instead of me.” “where is the girl?” said he; “i want to see her, go and bring her here.” she went out and told the servants that the scullery-maid was an impostor, and that they must take her out into the court-yard and strike off her head. the servants laid hold of maid maleen and wanted to drag her out, but she screamed so loudly for help, that the king’s son heard her voice, hurried out of his chamber and ordered them to set the maiden free instantly. lights were brought, and then he saw on her neck the gold chain which he had given her at the church-door. “thou art the true bride,” said he, “who went with me to the church; come with me now to my room.” when they were both alone, he said, “on the way to church thou didst name maid maleen, who was my betrothed bride; if i could believe it possible, i should think she was standing before me thou art like her in every respect.” she answered, “i am maid maleen, who for thy sake was imprisoned seven years in the darkness, who suffered hunger and thirst, and has lived so long in want and poverty. to-day, however, the sun is shining on me once more. i was married to thee in the church, and i am thy lawful wife.” then they kissed each other, and were happy all the days of their lives. the false bride was rewarded for what she had done by having her head cut off.
the tower in which maid maleen had been imprisoned remained standing for a long time, and when the children passed by it they sang,
“kling, klang, gloria.
who sits within this tower?
a king’s daughter, she sits within, a sight of her i cannot win, the wall it will not break, the stone cannot be pierced.
little hans, with your coat so gay, follow me, follow me, fast as you may.”
the lion and the crane
the bodhisatta was at one time born in the region of himavanta as a white crane; now brahmadatta was at that time reigning in benares. now it chanced that as a lion was eating meat a bone stuck in his throat.
the throat became swollen, he could not take food, his suffering was terrible. the crane seeing him, as he was perched on a tree looking for food, asked, "what ails thee, friend?" he told him why. "i could free thee from that bone, friend, but dare not enter thy mouth for fear thou mightest eat me." "don't be afraid, friend, i'll not eat thee; only save my life." "very well," says he, and caused him to lie down on his left side. but thinking to himself, "who knows what this fellow will do," he placed a small stick upright between his two jaws that he could not close his mouth, and inserting his head inside his mouth struck one end of the bone with his beak. whereupon the bone dropped and fell out. as soon as he had caused the bone to fall, he got out of the lion's mouth, striking the stick with his beak so that it fell out, and then settled on a branch. the lion gets well, and one day was eating a buffalo he had killed. the crane thinking "i will sound him," settled on a branch just over him, and in conversation spoke this first verse:
"a service have we done thee to the best of our ability, king of the beasts! your majesty!
what return shall we get from thee?"
in reply the lion spoke the second verse:
"as i feed on blood, and always hunt for prey, 'tis much that thou art still alive having once been between my teeth."
then in reply the crane said the two other verses:
"ungrateful, doing no good, not doing as he would be done by, in him there is no gratitude, to serve him is useless.
"his friendship is not won by the clearest good deed.
better softly withdraw from him, neither envying nor abusing."
and having thus spoken the crane flew away.
and when the great teacher, gautama the buddha, told this tale, he used to add: "now at that time the lion was devadatta the traitor, but the white crane was i myself."
how the raja's son won the princess labam.
in a country there was a raja who had an only son who every day went out to hunt. one day the rani, his mother, said to him, "you can hunt wherever you like on these three sides; but you must never go to the fourth side." this she said because she knew if he went on the fourth side he would hear of the beautiful princess labam, and that then he would leave his father and mother and seek for the princess.
the young prince listened to his mother, and obeyed her for some time; but one day, when he was hunting on the three sides where he was allowed to go, he remembered what she had said to him about the fourth side, and he determined to go and see why she had forbidden him to hunt on that side. when he got there, he found himself in a jungle, and nothing in the jungle but a quantity of parrots, who lived in it.
the young raja shot at some of them, and at once they all flew away up to the sky. all, that is, but one, and this was their raja, who was called hiraman parrot.
when hiraman parrot found himself left alone, he called out to the other parrots, "don't fly away and leave me alone when the raja's son shoots. if you desert me like this, i will tell the princess labam."
then the parrots all flew back to their raja, chattering. the prince was greatly surprised, and said, "why, these birds can talk!" then he said to the parrots, "who is the princess labam? where does she live?"
but the parrots would not tell him where she lived. "you can never get to the princess labam's country." that is all they would say.
the prince grew very sad when they would not tell him anything more; and he threw his gun away, and went home. when he got home, he would not speak or eat, but lay on his bed for four or five days, and seemed very ill.
at last he told his father and mother that he wanted to go and see the princess labam. "i must go," he said; "i must see what she is like.
tell me where her country is."
"we do not know where it is," answered his father and mother.
"then i must go and look for it," said the prince.
"no, no," they said, "you must not leave us. you are our only son.
stay with us. you will never find the princess labam."
"i must try and find her," said the prince. "perhaps god will show me the way. if i live and i find her, i will come back to you; but perhaps i shall die, and then i shall never see you again. still i must go."
so they had to let him go, though they cried very much at parting with him. his father gave him fine clothes to wear, and a fine horse. and he took his gun, and his bow and arrows, and a great many other weapons, "for," he said, "i may want them." his father, too, gave him plenty of rupees.
then he himself got his horse all ready for the journey, and he said good-bye to his father and mother; and his mother took her handkerchief and wrapped some sweetmeats in it, and gave it to her son. "my child," she said to him, "when you are hungry eat some of these sweetmeats."
he then set out on his journey, and rode on and on till he came to a jungle in which were a tank and shady trees. he bathed himself and his horse in the tank, and then sat down under a tree. "now," he said to himself, "i will eat some of the sweetmeats my mother gave me, and i will drink some water, and then i will continue my journey." he opened his handkerchief, and took out a sweetmeat. he found an ant in it. he took out another. there was an ant in that one too. so he laid the two sweetmeats on the ground, and he took out another, and another, and another, until he had taken them all out; but in each he found an ant.
"never mind," he said, "i won't eat the sweetmeats; the ants shall eat them." then the ant-raja came and stood before him and said, "you have been good to us. if ever you are in trouble, think of me and we will come to you."
the raja's son thanked him, mounted his horse and continued his journey. he rode on and on until he came to another jungle, and there he saw a tiger who had a thorn in his foot, and was roaring loudly from the pain.
"why do you roar like that?" said the young raja. "what is the matter with you?"
"i have had a thorn in my foot for twelve years," answered the tiger, "and it hurts me so; that is why i roar."
"well," said the raja's son, "i will take it out for you. but perhaps, as you are a tiger, when i have made you well, you will eat me?"
"oh, no," said the tiger, "i won't eat you. do make me well."
then the prince took a little knife from his pocket, and cut the thorn out of the tiger's foot; but when he cut, the tiger roared louder than ever so loud that his wife heard him in the next jungle, and came bounding along to see what was the matter. the tiger saw her coming, and hid the prince in the jungle, so that she should not see him.
"what man hurt you that you roared so loud?" said the wife.
"no one hurt me," answered the husband; "but a raja's son came and took the thorn out of my foot."
"where is he? show him to me," said his wife.
"if you promise not to kill him, i will call him," said the tiger.
"i won't kill him; only let me see him," answered his wife.
then the tiger called the raja's son, and when he came the tiger and his wife made him a great many salaams. then they gave him a good dinner, and he stayed with them for three days. every day he looked at the tiger's foot, and the third day it was quite healed. then he said good-bye to the tigers, and the tiger said to him, "if ever you are in trouble, think of me, and we will come to you."
the raja's son rode on and on till he came to a third jungle. here he found four fakirs whose teacher and master had died, and had left four things, a bed, which carried whoever sat on it whithersoever he wished to go; a bag, that gave its owner whatever he wanted, jewels, food, or clothes; a stone bowl that gave its owner as much water as he wanted, no matter how far he might be from a tank; and a stick and rope, to which its owner had only to say, if any one came to make war on him, "stick, beat as many men and soldiers as are here," and the stick would beat them and the rope would tie them up.
the four fakirs were quarrelling over these four things. one said, "i want this;" another said, "you cannot have it, for i want it;" and so on.
the raja's son said to them, "do not quarrel for these things. i will shoot four arrows in four different directions. whichever of you gets to my first arrow, shall have the first thing the bed. whosoever gets to the second arrow, shall have the second thing the bag. he who gets to the third arrow, shall have the third thing the bowl. and he who gets to the fourth arrow, shall have the last things the stick and rope." to this they agreed, and the prince shot off his first arrow.
away raced the fakirs to get it. when they brought it back to him he shot off the second, and when they had found and brought it to him he shot off his third, and when they had brought him the third he shot off the fourth.
while they were away looking for the fourth arrow the raja's son let his horse loose in the jungle, and sat on the bed, taking the bowl, the stick and rope, and the bag with him. then he said, "bed, i wish to go to the princess labam's country." the little bed instantly rose up into the air and began to fly, and it flew and flew till it came to the princess labam's country, where it settled on the ground. the raja's son asked some men he saw, "whose country is this?"
"the princess labam's country," they answered. then the prince went on till he came to a house where he saw an old woman.
"who are you?" she said. "where do you come from?"
"i come from a far country," he said; "do let me stay with you to-night."
"no," she answered, "i cannot let you stay with me; for our king has ordered that men from other countries may not stay in his country. you cannot stay in my house."
"you are my aunty," said the prince; "let me remain with you for this one night. you see it is evening, and if i go into the jungle, then the wild beasts will eat me."
"well," said the old woman, "you may stay here to-night; but to-morrow morning you must go away, for if the king hears you have passed the night in my house, he will have me seized and put into prison."
then she took him into her house, and the raja's son was very glad.
the old woman began preparing dinner, but he stopped her, "aunty," he said, "i will give you food." he put his hand into his bag, saying, "bag, i want some dinner," and the bag gave him instantly a delicious dinner, served up on two gold plates. the old woman and the raja's son then dined together.
when they had finished eating, the old woman said, "now i will fetch some water."
"don't go," said the prince. "you shall have plenty of water directly." so he took his bowl and said to it, "bowl, i want some water," and then it filled with water. when it was full, the prince cried out, "stop, bowl," and the bowl stopped filling. "see, aunty,"
he said, "with this bowl i can always get as much water as i want."
by this time night had come. "aunty," said the raja's son, "why don't you light a lamp?"
"there is no need," she said. "our king has forbidden the people in his country to light any lamps; for, as soon as it is dark, his daughter, the princess labam, comes and sits on her roof, and she shines so that she lights up all the country and our houses, and we can see to do our work as if it were day."
when it was quite black night the princess got up. she dressed herself in her rich clothes and jewels, and rolled up her hair, and across her head she put a band of diamonds and pearls. then she shone like the moon, and her beauty made night day. she came out of her room, and sat on the roof of her palace. in the daytime she never came out of her house; she only came out at night. all the people in her father's country then went about their work and finished it.
the raja's son watched the princess quietly, and was very happy. he said to himself, "how lovely she is!"
at midnight, when everybody had gone to bed, the princess came down from her roof, and went to her room; and when she was in bed and asleep, the raja's son got up softly, and sat on his bed. "bed," he said to it, "i want to go to the princess labam's bed-room." so the little bed carried him to the room where she lay fast asleep.
the young raja took his bag and said, "i want a great deal of betel-leaf," and it at once gave him quantities of betel-leaf. this he laid near the princess's bed, and then his little bed carried him back to the old woman's house.
next morning all the princess's servants found the betel-leaf, and began to eat it. "where did you get all that betel-leaf?" asked the princess.
"we found it near your bed," answered the servants. nobody knew the prince had come in the night and put it all there.
in the morning the old woman came to the raja's son. "now it is morning," she said, "and you must go; for if the king finds out all i have done for you, he will seize me."
"i am ill to-day, dear aunty," said the prince; "do let me stay till to-morrow morning."
"good," said the old woman. so he stayed, and they took their dinner out of the bag, and the bowl gave them water.
when night came the princess got up and sat on her roof, and at twelve o'clock, when every one was in bed, she went to her bed-room, and was soon fast asleep. then the raja's son sat on his bed, and it carried him to the princess. he took his bag and said, "bag, i want a most lovely shawl." it gave him a splendid shawl, and he spread it over the princess as she lay asleep. then he went back to the old woman's house and slept till morning.
in the morning, when the princess saw the shawl she was delighted.
"see, mother," she said; "khuda must have given me this shawl, it is so beautiful." her mother was very glad too.
"yes, my child," she said; "khuda must have given you this splendid shawl."
when it was morning the old woman said to the raja's son, "now you must really go."
"aunty," he answered, "i am not well enough yet. let me stay a few days longer. i will remain hidden in your house, so that no one may see me." so the old woman let him stay.
when it was black night, the princess put on her lovely clothes and jewels, and sat on her roof. at midnight she went to her room and went to sleep. then the raja's son sat on his bed and flew to her bed-room.
there he said to his bag, "bag, i want a very, very beautiful ring."
the bag gave him a glorious ring. then he took the princess labam's hand gently to put on the ring, and she started up very much frightened.
"who are you?" she said to the prince. "where do you come from? why do you come to my room?"
"do not be afraid, princess," he said; "i am no thief. i am a great raja's son. hiraman parrot, who lives in the jungle where i went to hunt, told me your name, and then i left my father and mother, and came to see you."
"well," said the princess, "as you are the son of such a great raja, i will not have you killed, and i will tell my father and mother that i wish to marry you."
the prince then returned to the old woman's house; and when morning came the princess said to her mother, "the son of a great raja has come to this country, and i wish to marry him." her mother told this to the king.
"good," said the king; "but if this raja's son wishes to marry my daughter, he must first do whatever i bid him. if he fails i will kill him. i will give him eighty pounds weight of mustard seed, and out of this he must crush the oil in one day. if he cannot do this he shall die."
in the morning the raja's son told the old woman that he intended to marry the princess. "oh," said the old woman, "go away from this country, and do not think of marrying her. a great many rajas and rajas' sons have come here to marry her, and her father has had them all killed. he says whoever wishes to marry his daughter must first do whatever he bids him. if he can, then he shall marry the princess; if he cannot, the king will have him killed. but no one can do the things the king tells him to do; so all the rajas and rajas' sons who have tried have been put to death. you will be killed too, if you try. do go away." but the prince would not listen to anything she said.
the king sent for the prince to the old woman's house, and his servants brought the raja's son to the king's court-house to the king.
there the king gave him eighty pounds of mustard seed, and told him to crush all the oil out of it that day, and bring it next morning to him to the court-house. "whoever wishes to marry my daughter," he said to the prince, "must first do all i tell him. if he cannot, then i have him killed. so if you cannot crush all the oil out of this mustard seed, you will die."
the prince was very sorry when he heard this. "how can i crush the oil out of all this mustard seed in one day?" he said to himself; "and if i do not, the king will kill me." he took the mustard seed to the old woman's house, and did not know what to do. at last he remembered the ant-raja, and the moment he did so, the ant-raja and his ants came to him. "why do you look so sad?" said the ant-raja.
the prince showed him the mustard seed, and said to him, "how can i crush the oil out of all this mustard seed in one day? and if i do not take the oil to the king to-morrow morning, he will kill me."
"be happy," said the ant-raja; "lie down and sleep; we will crush all the oil out for you during the day, and to-morrow morning you shall take it to the king." the raja's son lay down and slept, and the ants crushed out the oil for him. the prince was very glad when he saw the oil.
the next morning he took it to the court-house to the king. but the king said, "you cannot yet marry my daughter. if you wish to do so, you must first fight with my two demons and kill them." the king a long time ago had caught two demons, and then, as he did not know what to do with them, he had shut them up in a cage. he was afraid to let them loose for fear they would eat up all the people in his country; and he did not know how to kill them. so all the kings and kings' sons who wanted to marry the princess labam had to fight with these demons; "for," said the king to himself, "perhaps the demons may be killed, and then i shall be rid of them."
when he heard of the demons the raja's son was very sad. "what can i do?" he said to himself. "how can i fight with these two demons?" then he thought of his tiger: and the tiger and his wife came to him and said, "why are you so sad?" the raja's son answered, "the king has ordered me to fight with his two demons and kill them. how can i do this?" "do not be frightened," said the tiger. "be happy. i and my wife will fight with them for you."
then the raja's son took out of his bag two splendid coats. they were all gold and silver, and covered with pearls and diamonds. these he put on the tigers to make them beautiful, and he took them to the king, and said to him, "may these tigers fight your demons for me?"
"yes," said the king, who did not care in the least who killed his demons, provided they were killed. "then call your demons," said the raja's son, "and these tigers will fight them." the king did so, and the tigers and the demons fought and fought until the tigers had killed the demons.
"that is good," said the king. "but you must do something else before i give you my daughter. up in the sky i have a kettle-drum. you must go and beat it. if you cannot do this, i will kill you."
the raja's son thought of his little bed; so he went to the old woman's house and sat on his bed. "little bed," he said, "up in the sky is the king's kettle-drum. i want to go to it." the bed flew up with him, and the raja's son beat the drum, and the king heard him.
still, when he came down, the king would not give him his daughter.
"you have," he said to the prince, "done the three things i told you to do; but you must do one thing more." "if i can, i will," said the raja's son.
then the king showed him the trunk of a tree that was lying near his court-house. it was a very, very thick trunk. he gave the prince a wax hatchet, and said, "to-morrow morning you must cut this trunk in two with this wax hatchet."
the raja's son went back to the old woman's house. he was very sad, and thought that now the raja would certainly kill him. "i had his oil crushed out by the ants," he said to himself. "i had his demons killed by the tigers. my bed helped me to beat his kettle-drum. but now what can i do? how can i cut that thick tree-trunk in two with a wax hatchet?"
at night he went on his bed to see the princess. "to-morrow," he said to her, "your father will kill me." "why?" asked the princess.
"he has told me to cut a thick tree-trunk in two with a wax hatchet.
how can i ever do that?" said the raja's son. "do not be afraid," said the princess; "do as i bid you, and you will cut it in two quite easily."
then she pulled out a hair from her head, and gave it to the prince.
"to-morrow," she said, "when no one is near you, you must say to the tree-trunk, 'the princess labam commands you to let yourself be cut in two by this hair.' then stretch the hair down the edge of the wax hatchet's blade."
the prince next day did exactly as the princess had told him; and the minute the hair that was stretched down the edge of the hatchet-blade touched the tree-trunk it split into two pieces.
the king said, "now you can marry my daughter." then the wedding took place. all the rajas and kings of the countries round were asked to come to it, and there were great rejoicings. after a few days the prince's son said to his wife, "let us go to my father's country." the princess labam's father gave them a quantity of camels and horses and rupees and servants; and they travelled in great state to the prince's country, where they lived happily.
the prince always kept his bag, bowl, bed, and stick; only, as no one ever came to make war on him, he never needed to use the stick.
the lambikin
once upon a time there was a wee wee lambikin, who frolicked about on his little tottery legs, and enjoyed himself amazingly.
now one day he set off to visit his granny, and was jumping with joy to think of all the good things he should get from her, when who should he meet but a jackal, who looked at the tender young morsel and said: "lambikin! lambikin! i'll eat you!"
but lambikin only gave a little frisk and said:
"to granny's house i go, where i shall fatter grow, then you can eat me so."
the jackal thought this reasonable, and let lambikin pass.
by-and-by he met a vulture, and the vulture, looking hungrily at the tender morsel before him, said: "lambikin! lambikin! i'll eat you!"
but lambikin only gave a little frisk, and said:
"to granny's house i go, where i shall fatter grow, then you can eat me so."
the vulture thought this reasonable, and let lambikin pass.
and by-and-by he met a tiger, and then a wolf, and a dog, and an eagle, and all these, when they saw the tender little morsel, said:
"lambikin! lambikin! i'll eat you!"
but to all of them lambikin replied, with a little frisk:
"to granny's house i go, where i shall fatter grow, then you can eat me so."
at last he reached his granny's house, and said, all in a great hurry, "granny, dear, i've promised to get very fat; so, as people ought to keep their promises, please put me into the corn-bin at once."
so his granny said he was a good boy, and put him into the corn-bin, and there the greedy little lambikin stayed for seven days, and ate, and ate, and ate, until he could scarcely waddle, and his granny said he was fat enough for anything, and must go home. but cunning little lambikin said that would never do, for some animal would be sure to eat him on the way back, he was so plump and tender.
"i'll tell you what you must do," said master lambikin, "you must make a little drumikin out of the skin of my little brother who died, and then i can sit inside and trundle along nicely, for i'm as tight as a drum myself."
so his granny made a nice little drumikin out of his brother's skin, with the wool inside, and lambikin curled himself up snug and warm in the middle, and trundled away gaily. soon he met with the eagle, who called out:
"drumikin! drumikin!
have you seen lambikin?"
and mr. lambikin, curled up in his soft warm nest, replied:
"fallen into the fire, and so will you on little drumikin. tum-pa, tum-too!"
"how very annoying!" sighed the eagle, thinking regretfully of the tender morsel he had let slip.
meanwhile lambikin trundled along, laughing to himself, and singing:
"tum-pa, tum-too; tum-pa, tum-too!"
every animal and bird he met asked him the same question:
"drumikin! drumikin!
have you seen lambikin?"
and to each of them the little slyboots replied:
"fallen into the fire, and so will you on little drumikin. tum-pa, tum too; tum-pa, tum-too; tum-pa, tum-too!"
then they all sighed to think of the tender little morsel they had let slip.
at last the jackal came limping along, for all his sorry looks as sharp as a needle, and he too called out
"drumikin! drumikin!
have you seen lambikin?"
and lambikin, curled up in his snug little nest, replied gaily:
"fallen into the fire, and so will you on little drumikin! tum-pa "
but he never got any further, for the jackal recognised his voice at once, and cried: "hullo! you've turned yourself inside out, have you?
just you come out of that!"
whereupon he tore open drumikin and gobbled up lambikin.
punchkin
once upon a time there was a raja who had seven beautiful daughters.
they were all good girls; but the youngest, named balna, was more clever than the rest. the raja's wife died when they were quite little children, so these seven poor princesses were left with no mother to take care of them.
the raja's daughters took it by turns to cook their father's dinner every day, whilst he was absent deliberating with his ministers on the affairs of the nation.
about this time the prudhan died, leaving a widow and one daughter; and every day, every day, when the seven princesses were preparing their father's dinner, the prudhan's widow and daughter would come and beg for a little fire from the hearth. then balna used to say to her sisters, "send that woman away; send her away. let her get the fire at her own house. what does she want with ours? if we allow her to come here, we shall suffer for it some day."
but the other sisters would answer, "be quiet, balna; why must you always be quarrelling with this poor woman? let her take some fire if she likes." then the prudhan's widow used to go to the hearth and take a few sticks from it; and whilst no one was looking, she would quickly throw some mud into the midst of the dishes which were being prepared for the raja's dinner.
now the raja was very fond of his daughters. ever since their mother's death they had cooked his dinner with their own hands, in order to avoid the danger of his being poisoned by his enemies. so, when he found the mud mixed up with his dinner, he thought it must arise from their carelessness, as it did not seem likely that any one should have put mud there on purpose; but being very kind he did not like to reprove them for it, although this spoiling of the curry was repeated many successive days.
at last, one day, he determined to hide, and watch his daughters cooking, and see how it all happened; so he went into the next room, and watched them through a hole in the wall.
there he saw his seven daughters carefully washing the rice and preparing the curry, and as each dish was completed, they put it by the fire ready to be cooked. next he noticed the prudhan's widow come to the door, and beg for a few sticks from the fire to cook her dinner with. balna turned to her, angrily, and said, "why don't you keep fuel in your own house, and not come here every day and take ours? sisters, don't give this woman any more wood; let her buy it for herself."
then the eldest sister answered, "balna, let the poor woman take the wood and the fire; she does us no harm." but balna replied, "if you let her come here so often, maybe she will do us some harm, and make us sorry for it, some day."
the raja then saw the prudhan's widow go to the place where all his dinner was nicely prepared, and, as she took the wood, she threw a little mud into each of the dishes.
at this he was very angry, and sent to have the woman seized and brought before him. but when the widow came, she told him that she had played this trick because she wanted to gain an audience with him; and she spoke so cleverly, and pleased him so well with her cunning words, that instead of punishing her, the raja married her, and made her his ranee, and she and her daughter came to live in the palace.
now the new ranee hated the seven poor princesses, and wanted to get them, if possible, out of the way, in order that her daughter might have all their riches, and live in the palace as princess in their place; and instead of being grateful to them for their kindness to her, she did all she could to make them miserable. she gave them nothing but bread to eat, and very little of that, and very little water to drink; so these seven poor little princesses, who had been accustomed to have everything comfortable about them, and good food and good clothes all their lives long, were very miserable and unhappy; and they used to go out every day and sit by their dead mother's tomb and cry and say:
"oh mother, mother, cannot you see your poor children, how unhappy we are, and how we are starved by our cruel step-mother?"
one day, whilst they were thus sobbing and crying, lo and behold! a beautiful pomelo tree grew up out of the grave, covered with fresh ripe pomeloes, and the children satisfied their hunger by eating some of the fruit, and every day after this, instead of trying to eat the bad dinner their step-mother provided for them, they used to go out to their mother's grave and eat the pomeloes which grew there on the beautiful tree.
then the ranee said to her daughter, "i cannot tell how it is, every day those seven girls say they don't want any dinner, and won't eat any; and yet they never grow thin nor look ill; they look better than you do. i cannot tell how it is." and she bade her watch the seven princesses, and see if any one gave them anything to eat.
so next day, when the princesses went to their mother's grave, and were eating the beautiful pomeloes, the prudhan's daughter followed them, and saw them gathering the fruit.
then balna said to her sisters, "do you not see that girl watching us?
let us drive her away, or hide the pomeloes, else she will go and tell her mother all about it, and that will be very bad for us."
but the other sisters said, "oh no, do not be unkind, balna. the girl would never be so cruel as to tell her mother. let us rather invite her to come and have some of the fruit." and calling her to them, they gave her one of the pomeloes.
no sooner had she eaten it, however, than the prudhan's daughter went home and said to her mother, "i do not wonder the seven princesses will not eat the dinner you prepare for them, for by their mother's grave there grows a beautiful pomelo tree, and they go there every day and eat the pomeloes. i ate one, and it was the nicest i have ever tasted."
the cruel ranee was much vexed at hearing this, and all next day she stayed in her room, and told the raja that she had a very bad headache. the raja was deeply grieved, and said to his wife, "what can i do for you?" she answered, "there is only one thing that will make my headache well. by your dead wife's tomb there grows a fine pomelo tree; you must bring that here, and boil it, root and branch, and put a little of the water in which it has been boiled, on my forehead, and that will cure my headache." so the raja sent his servants, and had the beautiful pomelo tree pulled up by the roots, and did as the ranee desired; and when some of the water, in which it had been boiled, was put on her forehead, she said her headache was gone and she felt quite well.
next day, when the seven princesses went as usual to the grave of their mother, the pomelo tree had disappeared. then they all began to cry very bitterly.
now there was by the ranee's tomb a small tank, and as they were crying they saw that the tank was filled with a rich cream-like substance, which quickly hardened into a thick white cake. at seeing this all the princesses were very glad, and they ate some of the cake, and liked it; and next day the same thing happened, and so it went on for many days. every morning the princesses went to their mother's grave, and found the little tank filled with the nourishing cream-like cake. then the cruel step-mother said to her daughter: "i cannot tell how it is, i have had the pomelo tree which used to grow by the ranee's grave destroyed, and yet the princesses grow no thinner, nor look more sad, though they never eat the dinner i give them. i cannot tell how it is!"
and her daughter said, "i will watch."
next day, while the princesses were eating the cream cake, who should come by but their step-mother's daughter. balna saw her first, and said, "see, sisters, there comes that girl again. let us sit round the edge of the tank and not allow her to see it, for if we give her some of our cake, she will go and tell her mother; and that will be very unfortunate for us."
the other sisters, however, thought balna unnecessarily suspicious, and instead of following her advice, they gave the prudhan's daughter some of the cake, and she went home and told her mother all about it.
the ranee, on hearing how well the princesses fared, was exceedingly angry, and sent her servants to pull down the dead ranee's tomb, and fill the little tank with the ruins. and not content with this, she next day pretended to be very, very ill in fact, at the point of death and when the raja was much grieved, and asked her whether it was in his power to procure her any remedy, she said to him: "only one thing can save my life, but i know you will not do it." he replied, "yes, whatever it is, i will do it." she then said, "to save my life, you must kill the seven daughters of your first wife, and put some of their blood on my forehead and on the palms of my hands, and their death will be my life." at these words the raja was very sorrowful; but because he feared to break his word, he went out with a heavy heart to find his daughters.
he found them crying by the ruins of their mother's grave.
then, feeling he could not kill them, the raja spoke kindly to them, and told them to come out into the jungle with him; and there he made a fire and cooked some rice, and gave it to them. but in the afternoon, it being very hot, the seven princesses all fell asleep, and when he saw they were fast asleep, the raja, their father, stole away and left them (for he feared his wife), saying to himself: "it is better my poor daughters should die here, than be killed by their step-mother."
he then shot a deer, and returning home, put some of its blood on the forehead and hands of the ranee, and she thought then that he had really killed the princesses, and said she felt quite well.
meantime the seven princesses awoke, and when they found themselves all alone in the thick jungle they were much frightened, and began to call out as loud as they could, in hopes of making their father hear; but he was by that time far away, and would not have been able to hear them even had their voices been as loud as thunder.
it so happened that this very day the seven young sons of a neighbouring raja chanced to be hunting in that same jungle, and as they were returning home, after the day's sport was over, the youngest prince said to his brothers: "stop, i think i hear some one crying and calling out. do you not hear voices? let us go in the direction of the sound, and find out what it is."
so the seven princes rode through the wood until they came to the place where the seven princesses sat crying and wringing their hands.
at the sight of them the young princes were very much astonished, and still more so on learning their story; and they settled that each should take one of these poor forlorn ladies home with him, and marry her.
so the first and eldest prince took the eldest princess home with him, and married her.
and the second took the second;
and the third took the third;
and the fourth took the fourth;
and the fifth took the fifth;
and the sixth took the sixth;
and the seventh, and the handsomest of all, took the beautiful balna.
and when they got to their own land, there was great rejoicing throughout the kingdom, at the marriage of the seven young princes to seven such beautiful princesses.
about a year after this balna had a little son, and his uncles and aunts were so fond of the boy that it was as if he had seven fathers and seven mothers. none of the other princes and princesses had any children, so the son of the seventh prince and balna was acknowledged their heir by all the rest.
they had thus lived very happily for some time, when one fine day the seventh prince (balna's husband) said he would go out hunting, and away he went; and they waited long for him, but he never came back.
then his six brothers said they would go and see what had become of him; and they went away, but they also did not return.
and the seven princesses grieved very much, for they feared that their kind husbands must have been killed.
one day, not long after this had happened, as balna was rocking her baby's cradle, and whilst her sisters were working in the room below, there came to the palace door a man in a long black dress, who said that he was a fakir, and came to beg. the servants said to him, "you cannot go into the palace the raja's sons have all gone away; we think they must be dead, and their widows cannot be interrupted by your begging." but he said, "i am a holy man, you must let me in."
then the stupid servants let him walk through the palace, but they did not know that this was no fakir, but a wicked magician named punchkin.
punchkin fakir wandered through the palace, and saw many beautiful things there, till at last he reached the room where balna sat singing beside her little boy's cradle. the magician thought her more beautiful than all the other beautiful things he had seen, insomuch that he asked her to go home with him and to marry him. but she said, "my husband, i fear, is dead, but my little boy is still quite young; i will stay here and teach him to grow up a clever man, and when he is grown up he shall go out into the world, and try and learn tidings of his father. heaven forbid that i should ever leave him, or marry you."
at these words the magician was very angry, and turned her into a little black dog, and led her away; saying, "since you will not come with me of your own free will, i will make you." so the poor princess was dragged away, without any power of effecting an escape, or of letting her sisters know what had become of her. as punchkin passed through the palace gate the servants said to him, "where did you get that pretty little dog?" and he answered, "one of the princesses gave it to me as a present." at hearing which they let him go without further questioning.
soon after this, the six elder princesses heard the little baby, their nephew, begin to cry, and when they went upstairs they were much surprised to find him all alone, and balna nowhere to be seen. then they questioned the servants, and when they heard of the fakir and the little black dog, they guessed what had happened, and sent in every direction seeking them, but neither the fakir nor the dog were to be found. what could six poor women do? they gave up all hopes of ever seeing their kind husbands, and their sister, and her husband, again, and devoted themselves thenceforward to teaching and taking care of their little nephew.
thus time went on, till balna's son was fourteen years old. then, one day, his aunts told him the history of the family; and no sooner did he hear it, than he was seized with a great desire to go in search of his father and mother and uncles, and if he could find them alive to bring them home again. his aunts, on learning his determination, were much alarmed and tried to dissuade him, saying, "we have lost our husbands, and our sister and her husband, and you are now our sole hope; if you go away, what shall we do?" but he replied, "i pray you not to be discouraged; i will return soon, and if it is possible bring my father and mother and uncles with me." so he set out on his travels; but for some months he could learn nothing to help him in his search.
at last, after he had journeyed many hundreds of weary miles, and become almost hopeless of ever hearing anything further of his parents, he one day came to a country that seemed full of stones, and rocks, and trees, and there he saw a large palace with a high tower; hard by which was a malee's little house.
as he was looking about, the malee's wife saw him, and ran out of the house and said, "my dear boy, who are you that dare venture to this dangerous place?" he answered, "i am a raja's son, and i come in search of my father, and my uncles, and my mother whom a wicked enchanter bewitched."
then the malee's wife said, "this country and this palace belong to a great enchanter; he is all powerful, and if any one displeases him, he can turn them into stones and trees. all the rocks and trees you see here were living people once, and the magician turned them to what they now are. some time ago a raja's son came here, and shortly afterwards came his six brothers, and they were all turned into stones and trees; and these are not the only unfortunate ones, for up in that tower lives a beautiful princess, whom the magician has kept prisoner there for twelve years, because she hates him and will not marry him."
then the little prince thought, "these must be my parents and my uncles. i have found what i seek at last." so he told his story to the malee's wife, and begged her to help him to remain in that place awhile and inquire further concerning the unhappy people she mentioned; and she promised to befriend him, and advised his disguising himself lest the magician should see him, and turn him likewise into stone. to this the prince agreed. so the malee's wife dressed him up in a saree, and pretended that he was her daughter.
one day, not long after this, as the magician was walking in his garden he saw the little girl (as he thought) playing about, and asked her who she was. she told him she was the malee's daughter, and the magician said, "you are a pretty little girl, and to-morrow you shall take a present of flowers from me to the beautiful lady who lives in the tower."
the young prince was much delighted at hearing this, and went immediately to inform the malee's wife; after consultation with whom he determined that it would be more safe for him to retain his disguise, and trust to the chance of a favourable opportunity for establishing some communication with his mother, if it were indeed she.
now it happened that at balna's marriage her husband had given her a small gold ring on which her name was engraved, and she had put it on her little son's finger when he was a baby, and afterwards when he was older his aunts had had it enlarged for him, so that he was still able to wear it. the malee's wife advised him to fasten the well-known treasure to one of the bouquets he presented to his mother, and trust to her recognising it. this was not to be done without difficulty, as such a strict watch was kept over the poor princess (for fear of her ever establishing communication with her friends), that though the supposed malee's daughter was permitted to take her flowers every day, the magician or one of his slaves was always in the room at the time.
at last one day, however, opportunity favoured him, and when no one was looking, the boy tied the ring to a nosegay, and threw it at balna's feet. it fell with a clang on the floor, and balna, looking to see what made the strange sound, found the little ring tied to the flowers. on recognising it, she at once believed the story her son told her of his long search, and begged him to advise her as to what she had better do; at the same time entreating him on no account to endanger his life by trying to rescue her. she told him that for twelve long years the magician had kept her shut up in the tower because she refused to marry him, and she was so closely guarded that she saw no hope of release.
now balna's son was a bright, clever boy, so he said, "do not fear, dear mother; the first thing to do is to discover how far the magician's power extends, in order that we may be able to liberate my father and uncles, whom he has imprisoned in the form of rocks and trees. you have spoken to him angrily for twelve long years; now rather speak kindly. tell him you have given up all hopes of again seeing the husband you have so long mourned, and say you are willing to marry him. then endeavour to find out what his power consists in, and whether he is immortal, or can be put to death."
balna determined to take her son's advice; and the next day sent for punchkin, and spoke to him as had been suggested.
the magician, greatly delighted, begged her to allow the wedding to take place as soon as possible.
but she told him that before she married him he must allow her a little more time, in which she might make his acquaintance, and that, after being enemies so long, their friendship could but strengthen by degrees. "and do tell me," she said, "are you quite immortal? can death never touch you? and are you too great an enchanter ever to feel human suffering?"
"why do you ask?" said he.
"because," she replied, "if i am to be your wife, i would fain know all about you, in order, if any calamity threatens you, to overcome, or if possible to avert it."
"it is true," he added, "that i am not as others. far, far away, hundreds of thousands of miles from this, there lies a desolate country covered with thick jungle. in the midst of the jungle grows a circle of palm trees, and in the centre of the circle stand six chattees full of water, piled one above another: below the sixth chattee is a small cage which contains a little green parrot; on the life of the parrot depends my life; and if the parrot is killed i must die. it is, however," he added, "impossible that the parrot should sustain any injury, both on account of the inaccessibility of the country, and because, by my appointment, many thousand genii surround the palm trees, and kill all who approach the place."
balna told her son what punchkin had said; but at the same time implored him to give up all idea of getting the parrot.
the prince, however, replied, "mother, unless i can get hold of that parrot, you, and my father, and uncles, cannot be liberated: be not afraid, i will shortly return. do you, meantime, keep the magician in good humour still putting off your marriage with him on various pretexts; and before he finds out the cause of delay, i will be here."
so saying, he went away.
many, many weary miles did he travel, till at last he came to a thick jungle; and, being very tired, sat down under a tree and fell asleep.
he was awakened by a soft rustling sound, and looking about him, saw a large serpent which was making its way to an eagle's nest built in the tree under which he lay, and in the nest were two young eagles. the prince seeing the danger of the young birds, drew his sword, and killed the serpent; at the same moment a rushing sound was heard in the air, and the two old eagles, who had been out hunting for food for their young ones, returned. they quickly saw the dead serpent and the young prince standing over it; and the old mother eagle said to him, "dear boy, for many years all our young ones have been devoured by that cruel serpent; you have now saved the lives of our children; whenever you are in need, therefore, send to us and we will help you; and as for these little eagles, take them, and let them be your servants."
at this the prince was very glad, and the two eaglets crossed their wings, on which he mounted; and they carried him far, far away over the thick jungles, until he came to the place where grew the circle of palm trees, in the midst of which stood the six chattees full of water. it was the middle of the day, and the heat was very great. all round the trees were the genii fast asleep; nevertheless, there were such countless thousands of them, that it would have been quite impossible for any one to walk through their ranks to the place; down swooped the strong-winged eaglets down jumped the prince; in an instant he had overthrown the six chattees full of water, and seized the little green parrot, which he rolled up in his cloak; while, as he mounted again into the air, all the genii below awoke, and finding their treasure gone, set up a wild and melancholy howl.
away, away flew the little eagles, till they came to their home in the great tree; then the prince said to the old eagles, "take back your little ones; they have done me good service; if ever again i stand in need of help, i will not fail to come to you." he then continued his journey on foot till he arrived once more at the magician's palace, where he sat down at the door and began playing with the parrot.
punchkin saw him, and came to him quickly, and said, "my boy, where did you get that parrot? give it to me, i pray you."
but the prince answered, "oh no, i cannot give away my parrot, it is a great pet of mine; i have had it many years."
then the magician said, "if it is an old favourite, i can understand your not caring to give it away; but come what will you sell it for?"
"sir," replied the prince, "i will not sell my parrot."
then punchkin got frightened, and said, "anything, anything; name what price you will, and it shall be yours." the prince answered, "let the seven raja's sons whom you turned into rocks and trees be instantly liberated."
"it is done as you desire," said the magician, "only give me my parrot." and with that, by a stroke of his wand, balna's husband and his brothers resumed their natural shapes. "now, give me my parrot,"
repeated punchkin.
"not so fast, my master," rejoined the prince; "i must first beg that you will restore to life all whom you have thus imprisoned."
the magician immediately waved his wand again; and, whilst he cried, in an imploring voice, "give me my parrot!" the whole garden became suddenly alive: where rocks, and stones, and trees had been before, stood rajas, and punts, and sirdars, and mighty men on prancing horses, and jewelled pages, and troops of armed attendants.
"give me my parrot!" cried punchkin. then the boy took hold of the parrot, and tore off one of its wings; and as he did so the magician's right arm fell off.
punchkin then stretched out his left arm, crying, "give me my parrot!"
the prince pulled off the parrot's second wing, and the magician's left arm tumbled off.
"give me my parrot!" cried he, and fell on his knees. the prince pulled off the parrot's right leg, the magician's right leg fell off:
the prince pulled off the parrot's left leg, down fell the magician's left.
nothing remained of him save the limbless body and the head; but still he rolled his eyes, and cried, "give me my parrot!" "take your parrot, then," cried the boy, and with that he wrung the bird's neck, and threw it at the magician; and, as he did so, punchkin's head twisted round, and, with a fearful groan, he died!
then they let balna out of the tower; and she, her son, and the seven princes went to their own country, and lived very happily ever afterwards. and as to the rest of the world, every one went to his own house.
the broken pot
there lived in a certain place a brahman, whose name was svabhavakripana, which means "a born miser." he had collected a quantity of rice by begging, and after having dined off it, he filled a pot with what was left over. he hung the pot on a peg on the wall, placed his couch beneath, and looking intently at it all the night, he thought, "ah, that pot is indeed brimful of rice. now, if there should be a famine, i should certainly make a hundred rupees by it. with this i shall buy a couple of goats. they will have young ones every six months, and thus i shall have a whole herd of goats. then, with the goats, i shall buy cows. as soon as they have calved, i shall sell the calves. then, with the calves, i shall buy buffaloes; with the buffaloes, mares. when the mares have foaled, i shall have plenty of horses; and when i sell them, plenty of gold. with that gold i shall get a house with four wings. and then a brahman will come to my house, and will give me his beautiful daughter, with a large dowry. she will have a son, and i shall call him somasarman.
when he is old enough to be danced on his father's knee, i shall sit with a book at the back of the stable, and while i am reading, the boy will see me, jump from his mother's lap, and run towards me to be danced on my knee. he will come too near the horse's hoof, and, full of anger, i shall call to my wife, 'take the baby; take him!' but she, distracted by some domestic work, does not hear me. then i get up, and give her such a kick with my foot." while he thought this, he gave a kick with his foot, and broke the pot. all the rice fell over him, and made him quite white. therefore, i say, "he who makes foolish plans for the future will be white all over, like the father of somasarman."
the magic fiddle
once upon a time there lived seven brothers and a sister. the brothers were married, but their wives did not do the cooking for the family.
it was done by their sister, who stopped at home to cook. the wives for this reason bore their sister-in-law much ill-will, and at length they combined together to oust her from the office of cook and general provider, so that one of themselves might obtain it. they said, "she does not go out to the fields to work, but remains quietly at home, and yet she has not the meals ready at the proper time." they then called upon their bonga, and vowing vows unto him they secured his good-will and assistance; then they said to the bonga, "at midday when our sister-in-law goes to bring water, cause it thus to happen, that on seeing her pitcher the water shall vanish, and again slowly re-appear. in this way she will be delayed. let the water not flow into her pitcher, and you may keep the maiden as your own."
at noon when she went to bring water, it suddenly dried up before her, and she began to weep. then after a while the water began slowly to rise. when it reached her ankles she tried to fill her pitcher, but it would not go under the water. being frightened she began to wail and cry to her brother:
"oh! my brother, the water reaches to my ankles, still, oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip."
the water continued to rise until it reached her knee, when she began to wail again:
"oh! my brother, the water reaches to my knee, still, oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip."
the water continued to rise, and when it reached her waist, she cried again:
"oh! my brother, the water reaches to my waist, still, oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip."
the water still rose, and when it reached her neck she kept on crying:
"oh! my brother, the water reaches to my neck, still, oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip."
at length the water became so deep that she felt herself drowning, then she cried aloud:
"oh! my brother, the water measures a man's height, oh! my brother, the pitcher begins to fill."
the pitcher filled with water, and along with it she sank and was drowned. the bonga then transformed her into a bonga like himself, and carried her off.
after a time she re-appeared as a bamboo growing on the embankment of the tank in which she had been drowned. when the bamboo had grown to an immense size, a jogi, who was in the habit of passing that way, seeing it, said to himself, "this will make a splendid fiddle." so one day he brought an axe to cut it down; but when he was about to begin, the bamboo called out, "do not cut at the root, cut higher up." when he lifted his axe to cut high up the stem, the bamboo cried out, "do not cut near the top, cut at the root." when the jogi again prepared himself to cut at the root as requested, the bamboo said, "do not cut at the root, cut higher up;" and when he was about to cut higher up, it again called out to him, "do not cut high up, cut at the root." the jogi by this time felt sure that a bonga was trying to frighten him, so becoming angry he cut down the bamboo at the root, and taking it away made a fiddle out of it. the instrument had a superior tone and delighted all who heard it. the jogi carried it with him when he went a-begging, and through the influence of its sweet music he returned home every evening with a full wallet.
he now and then visited, when on his rounds, the house of the bonga girl's brothers, and the strains of the fiddle affected them greatly.
some of them were moved even to tears, for the fiddle seemed to wail as one in bitter anguish. the elder brother wished to purchase it, and offered to support the jogi for a whole year if he would consent to part with his wonderful instrument. the jogi, however, knew its value, and refused to sell it.
it so happened that the jogi some time after went to the house of a village chief, and after playing a tune or two on his fiddle asked for something to eat. they offered to buy his fiddle and promised a high price for it, but he refused to sell it, as his fiddle brought to him his means of livelihood. when they saw that he was not to be prevailed upon, they gave him food and a plentiful supply of liquor. of the latter he drank so freely that he presently became intoxicated. while he was in this condition, they took away his fiddle, and substituted their own old one for it. when the jogi recovered, he missed his instrument, and suspecting that it had been stolen asked them to return it to him. they denied having taken it, so he had to depart, leaving his fiddle behind him. the chief's son, being a musician, used to play on the jogi's fiddle, and in his hands the music it gave forth delighted the ears of all who heard it.
when all the household were absent at their labours in the fields, the bonga girl used to come out of the bamboo fiddle, and prepared the family meal. having eaten her own share, she placed that of the chief's son under his bed, and covering it up to keep off the dust, re-entered the fiddle. this happening every day, the other members of the household thought that some girl friend of theirs was in this manner showing her interest in the young man, so they did not trouble themselves to find out how it came about. the young chief, however, was determined to watch, and see which of his girl friends was so attentive to his comfort. he said in his own mind, "i will catch her to-day, and give her a sound beating; she is causing me to be ashamed before the others." so saying, he hid himself in a corner in a pile of firewood. in a short time the girl came out of the bamboo fiddle, and began to dress her hair. having completed her toilet, she cooked the meal of rice as usual, and having eaten some herself, she placed the young man's portion under his bed, as before, and was about to enter the fiddle again, when he, running out from his hiding-place, caught her in his arms. the bonga girl exclaimed, "fie! fie! you may be a dom, or you may be a hadi of some other caste with whom i cannot marry." he said, "no. but from to-day, you and i are one." so they began lovingly to hold converse with each other. when the others returned home in the evening, they saw that she was both a human being and a bonga, and they rejoiced exceedingly.
now in course of time the bonga girl's family became very poor, and her brothers on one occasion came to the chief's house on a visit.
the bonga girl recognised them at once, but they did not know who she was. she brought them water on their arrival, and afterwards set cooked rice before them. then sitting down near them, she began in wailing tones to upbraid them on account of the treatment she had been subjected to by their wives. she related all that had befallen her, and wound up by saying, "you must have known it all, and yet you did not interfere to save me." and that was all the revenge she took.
the cruel crane outwitted
long ago the bodisat was born to a forest life as the genius of a tree standing near a certain lotus pond.
now at that time the water used to run short at the dry season in a certain pond, not over large, in which there were a good many fish.
and a crane thought on seeing the fish:
"i must outwit these fish somehow or other and make a prey of them."
and he went and sat down at the edge of the water, thinking how he should do it.
when the fish saw him, they asked him, "what are you sitting there for, lost in thought?"
"i am sitting thinking about you," said he.
"oh, sir! what are you thinking about us?" said they.
"why," he replied; "there is very little water in this pond, and but little for you to eat; and the heat is so great! so i was thinking, 'what in the world will these fish do now?'"
"yes, indeed, sir! what are we to do?" said they.
"if you will only do as i bid you, i will take you in my beak to a fine large pond, covered with all the kinds of lotuses, and put you into it," answered the crane.
"that a crane should take thought for the fishes is a thing unheard of, sir, since the world began. it's eating us, one after the other, that you're aiming at."
"not i! so long as you trust me, i won't eat you. but if you don't believe me that there is such a pond, send one of you with me to go and see it."
then they trusted him, and handed over to him one of their number a big fellow, blind of one eye, whom they thought sharp enough in any emergency, afloat or ashore.
him the crane took with him, let him go in the pond, showed him the whole of it, brought him back, and let him go again close to the other fish. and he told them all the glories of the pond.
and when they heard what he said, they exclaimed, "all right, sir! you may take us with you."
then the crane took the old purblind fish first to the bank of the other pond, and alighted in a varana-tree growing on the bank there.
but he threw it into a fork of the tree, struck it with his beak, and killed it; and then ate its flesh, and threw its bones away at the foot of the tree. then he went back and called out:
"i've thrown that fish in; let another one come."
and in that manner he took all the fish, one by one, and ate them, till he came back and found no more!
but there was still a crab left behind there; and the crane thought he would eat him too, and called out:
"i say, good crab, i've taken all the fish away, and put them into a fine large pond. come along. i'll take you too!"
"but how will you take hold of me to carry me along?"
"i'll bite hold of you with my beak."
"you'll let me fall if you carry me like that. i won't go with you!"
"don't be afraid! i'll hold you quite tight all the way."
then said the crab to himself, "if this fellow once got hold of fish, he would never let them go in a pond! now if he should really put me into the pond, it would be capital; but if he doesn't then i'll cut his throat, and kill him!" so he said to him:
"look here, friend, you won't be able to hold me tight enough; but we crabs have a famous grip. if you let me catch hold of you round the neck with my claws, i shall be glad to go with you."
and the other did not see that he was trying to outwit him, and agreed. so the crab caught hold of his neck with his claws as securely as with a pair of blacksmith's pincers, and called out, "off with you, now!"
and the crane took him and showed him the pond, and then turned off towards the varana-tree.
"uncle!" cried the crab, "the pond lies that way, but you are taking me this way!"
"oh, that's it, is it?" answered the crane. "your dear little uncle, your very sweet nephew, you call me! you mean me to understand, i suppose, that i am your slave, who has to lift you up and carry you about with him! now cast your eye upon the heap of fish-bones lying at the root of yonder varana-tree. just as i have eaten those fish, every one of them, just so i will devour you as well!"
"ah! those fishes got eaten through their own stupidity," answered the crab; "but i'm not going to let you eat me. on the contrary, is it you that i am going to destroy. for you in your folly have not seen that i was outwitting you. if we die, we die both together; for i will cut off this head of yours, and cast it to the ground!" and so saying, he gave the crane's neck a grip with his claws, as with a vice.
then gasping, and with tears trickling from his eyes, and trembling with the fear of death, the crane beseeched him, saying, "o my lord!
indeed i did not intend to eat you. grant me my life!"
"well, well! step down into the pond, and put me in there."
and he turned round and stepped down into the pond, and placed the crab on the mud at its edge. but the crab cut through its neck as clean as one would cut a lotus-stalk with a hunting-knife, and then only entered the water!
when the genius who lived in the varana-tree saw this strange affair, he made the wood resound with his plaudits, uttering in a pleasant voice the verse:
"the villain, though exceeding clever, shall prosper not by his villainy.
he may win indeed, sharp-witted in deceit, but only as the crane here from the crab!"
loving laili
once there was a king called king dantal, who had a great many rupees and soldiers and horses. he had also an only son called prince majnun, who was a handsome boy with white teeth, red lips, blue eyes, red cheeks, red hair, and a white skin. this boy was very fond of playing with the wazir's son, husain mahamat, in king dantal's garden, which was very large and full of delicious fruits, and flowers, and trees.
they used to take their little knives there and cut the fruits and eat them. king dantal had a teacher for them to teach them to read and write.
one day, when they were grown two fine young men, prince majnun said to his father, "husain mahamat and i should like to go and hunt." his father said they might go, so they got ready their horses and all else they wanted for their hunting, and went to the phalana country, hunting all the way, but they only founds jackals and birds.
the raja of the phalana country was called munsuk raja, and he had a daughter named laili, who was very beautiful; she had brown eyes and black hair.
one night, some time before prince majnun came to her father's kingdom, as she slept, khuda sent to her an angel in the form of a man who told her that she should marry prince majnun and no one else, and that this was khuda's command to her. when laili woke she told her father of the angel's visit to her as she slept; but her father paid no attention to her story. from that time she began repeating, "majnun, majnun; i want majnun," and would say nothing else. even as she sat and ate her food she kept saying, "majnun, majnun; i want majnun." her father used to get quite vexed with her. "who is this majnun? who ever heard of this majnun?" he would say.
"he is the man i am to marry," said laili. "khuda has ordered me to marry no one but majnun." and she was half mad.
meanwhile, majnun and husain mahamat came to hunt in the phalana country; and as they were riding about, laili came out on her horse to eat the air, and rode behind them. all the time she kept saying, "majnun, majnun; i want majnun." the prince heard her, and turned round. "who is calling me?" he asked. at this laili looked at him, and the moment she saw him she fell deeply in love with him, and she said to herself, "i am sure that is the prince majnun that khuda says i am to marry." and she went home to her father and said, "father, i wish to marry the prince who has come to your kingdom; for i know he is the prince majnun i am to marry."
"very well, you shall have him for your husband," said munsuk raja.
"we will ask him to-morrow." laili consented to wait, although she was very impatient. as it happened, the prince left the phalana kingdom that night, and when laili heard he was gone, she went quite mad. she would not listen to a word her father, or her mother, or her servants said to her, but went off into the jungle, and wandered from jungle to jungle, till she got farther and farther away from her own country.
all the time she kept saying, "majnun, majnun; i want majnun;" and so she wandered about for twelve years.
at the end of the twelve years she met a fakir he was really an angel, but she did not know this who asked her, "why do you always say, 'majnun, majnun; i want majnun'?" she answered, "i am the daughter of the king of the phalana country, and i want to find prince majnun; tell me where his kingdom is."
"i think you will never get there," said the fakir, "for it is very far from hence, and you have to cross many rivers to reach it." but laili said she did not care; she must see prince majnun. "well," said the fakir, "when you come to the bhagirathi river you will see a big fish, a rohu; and you must get him to carry you to prince majnun's country, or you will never reach it."
she went on and on, and at last she came to the bhagirathi river.
there was a great big fish called the rohu fish. it was yawning just as she got up to it, and she instantly jumped down its throat into its stomach. all the time she kept saying, "majnun, majnun." at this the rohu fish was greatly alarmed and swam down the river as fast as he could. by degrees he got tired and went slower, and a crow came and perched on his back, and said "caw, caw." "oh, mr. crow," said the poor fish "do see what is in my stomach that makes such a noise."
"very well," said the crow, "open your mouth wide, and i'll fly down and see." so the rohu opened his jaws and the crow flew down, but he came up again very quickly. "you have a rakshas in your stomach," said the crow, and he flew away. this news did not comfort the poor rohu, and he swam on and on till he came to prince majnun's country. there he stopped. and a jackal came down to the river to drink. "oh, jackal," said the rohu, "do tell me what i have inside me."
"how can i tell?" said the jackal. "i cannot see unless i go inside you." so the rohu opened his mouth wide, and the jackal jumped down his throat; but he came up very quickly, looking much frightened and saying, "you have a rakshas in your stomach, and if i don't run away quickly, i am afraid it will eat me." so off he ran. after the jackal came an enormous snake. "oh," says the fish, "do tell me what i have in my stomach, for it rattles about so, and keeps saying, 'majnun, majnun; i want majnun.'"
the snake said, "open your mouth wide, and i'll go down and see what it is." the snake went down: when he returned he said, "you have a rakshas in your stomach, but if you will let me cut you open, it will come out of you." "if you do that, i shall die," said the rohu. "oh, no," said the snake, "you will not, for i will give you a medicine that will make you quite well again." so the fish agreed, and the snake got a knife and cut him open, and out jumped laili.
she was now very old. twelve years she had wandered about the jungle, and for twelve years she had lived inside her rohu; and she was no longer beautiful, and had lost her teeth. the snake took her on his back and carried her into the country, and there he put her down, and she wandered on and on till she got to majnun's court-house, where king majnun was sitting. there some men heard her crying, "majnun, majnun; i want majnun," and they asked her what she wanted. "i want king majnun," she said.
so they went in and said to prince majnun, "an old woman outside says she wants you." "i cannot leave this place," said he; "send her in here." they brought her in and the prince asked her what she wanted.
"i want to marry you," she answered. "twenty-four years ago you came to my father the phalana raja's country, and i wanted to marry you then; but you went away without marrying me. then i went mad, and i have wandered about all these years looking for you." prince majnun said, "very good."
"pray to khuda," said laili, "to make us both young again, and then we shall be married." so the prince prayed to khuda, and khuda said to him, "touch laili's clothes and they will catch fire, and when they are on fire, she and you will become young again." when he touched laili's clothes they caught fire, and she and he became young again.
and there were great feasts, and they were married, and travelled to the phalana country to see her father and mother.
now laili's father and mother had wept so much for their daughter that they had become quite blind, and her father kept always repeating, "laili, laili, laili." when laili saw their blindness, she prayed to khuda to restore their sight to them, which he did. as soon as the father and mother saw laili, they hugged her and kissed her, and then they had the wedding all over again amid great rejoicings. prince majnun and laili stayed with munsuk raja and his wife for three years, and then they returned to king dantal, and lived happily for some time with him.
they used to go out hunting, and they often went from country to country to eat the air and amuse themselves.
one day prince majnun said to laili, "let us go through this jungle."
"no, no," said laili; "if we go through this jungle, some harm will happen to me." but prince majnun laughed, and went into the jungle.
and as they were going through it, khuda thought, "i should like to know how much prince majnun loves his wife. would he be very sorry if she died? and would he marry another wife? i will see." so he sent one of his angels in the form of a fakir into the jungle; and the angel went up to laili, and threw some powder in her face, and instantly she fell to the ground a heap of ashes.
prince majnun was in great sorrow and grief when he saw his dear laili turned into a little heap of ashes; and he went straight home to his father, and for a long, long time he would not be comforted. after a great many years he grew more cheerful and happy, and began to go again into his father's beautiful garden with husain mahamat. king dantal wished his son to marry again. "i will only have laili for my wife; i will not marry any other woman," said prince majnun.
"how can you marry laili? laili is dead. she will never come back to you," said the father.
"then i'll not have any wife at all," said prince majnun.
meanwhile laili was living in the jungle where her husband had left her a little heap of ashes. as soon as majnun had gone, the fakir had taken her ashes and made them quite clean, and then he had mixed clay and water with the ashes, and made the figure of a woman with them, and so laili regained her human form, and khuda sent life into it. but laili had become once more a hideous old woman, with a long, long nose, and teeth like tusks; just such an old woman, excepting her teeth, as she had been when she came out of the rohu fish; and she lived in the jungle, and neither ate nor drank, and she kept on saying, "majnun, majnun; i want majnun."
at last the angel who had come as a fakir and thrown the powder at her, said to khuda, "of what use is it that this woman should sit in the jungle crying, crying for ever, 'majnun, majnun; i want majnun,'
and eating and drinking nothing? let me take her to prince majnun."
"well," said khuda, "you may do so; but tell her that she must not speak to majnun if he is afraid of her when he sees her; and that if he is afraid when he sees her, she will become a little white dog the next day. then she must go to the palace, and she will only regain her human shape when prince majnun loves her, feeds her with his own food, and lets her sleep in his bed."
so the angel came to laili again as a fakir and carried her to king dantal's garden. "now," he said, "it is khuda's command that you stay here till prince majnun comes to walk in the garden, and then you may show yourself to him. but you must not speak to him, if he is afraid of you; and should he be afraid of you, you will the next day become a little white dog." he then told her what she must do as a little dog to regain her human form.
laili stayed in the garden, hidden in the tall grass, till prince majnun and husain mahamat came to walk in the garden. king dantal was now a very old man, and husain mahamat, though he was really only as old as prince majnun, looked a great deal older than the prince, who had been made quite young again when he married laili.
as prince majnun and the wazir's son walked in the garden, they gathered the fruit as they had done as little children, only they bit the fruit with their teeth; they did not cut it. while majnun was busy eating a fruit in this way, and was talking to husain mahamat, he turned towards him and saw laili walking behind the wazir's son. "oh, look, look!" he cried, "see what is following you; it is a rakshas or a demon, and i am sure it is going to eat us." laili looked at him beseechingly with all her eyes, and trembled with age and eagerness; but this only frightened majnun the more. "it is a rakshas, a rakshas!" he cried, and he ran quickly to the palace with the wazir's son; and as they ran away, laili disappeared into the jungle. they ran to king dantal, and majnun told him there was a rakshas or a demon in the garden that had come to eat them.
"what nonsense," said his father. "fancy two grown men being so frightened by an old ayah or a fakir! and if it had been a rakshas, it would not have eaten you." indeed king dantal did not believe majnun had seen anything at all, till husain mahamat said the prince was speaking the exact truth. they had the garden searched for the terrible old woman, but found nothing, and king dantal told his son he was very silly to be so much frightened. however, prince majnun would not walk in the garden any more.
the next day laili turned into a pretty little dog; and in this shape she came into the palace, where prince majnun soon became very fond of her. she followed him everywhere, went with him when he was out hunting, and helped him to catch his game, and prince majnun fed her with milk, or bread, or anything else he was eating, and at night the little dog slept in his bed.
but one night the little dog disappeared, and in its stead there lay the little old woman who had frightened him so much in the garden; and now prince majnun was quite sure she was a rakshas, or a demon, or some such horrible thing come to eat him; and in his terror he cried out, "what do you want? oh, do not eat me; do not eat me!" poor laili answered, "don't you know me? i am your wife laili, and i want to marry you. don't you remember how you would go through that jungle, though i begged and begged you not to go, for i told you that harm would happen to me, and then a fakir came and threw powder in my face, and i became a heap of ashes. but khuda gave me my life again, and brought me here, after i had stayed a long, long while in the jungle crying for you, and now i am obliged to be a little dog; but if you will marry me, i shall not be a little dog any more." majnun, however, said "how can i marry an old woman like you? how can you be laili? i am sure you are a rakshas or a demon come to eat me," and he was in great terror.
in the morning the old woman had turned into the little dog, and the prince went to his father and told him all that had happened. "an old woman! an old woman! always an old woman!" said his father. "you do nothing but think of old women. how can a strong man like you be so easily frightened?" however, when he saw that his son was really in great terror, and that he really believed the old woman would came back at night, he advised him to say to her, "i will marry you if you can make yourself a young girl again. how can i marry such an old woman as you are?"
that night as he lay trembling in bed the little old woman lay there in place of the dog, crying "majnun, majnun, i want to marry you. i have loved you all these long, long years. when i was in my father's kingdom a young girl, i knew of you, though you knew nothing of me, and we should have been married then if you had not gone away so suddenly, and for long, long years i followed you." "well," said majnun, "if you can make yourself a young girl again, i will marry you."
laili said, "oh, that is quite easy. khuda will make me a young girl again. in two days' time you must go into the garden, and there you will see a beautiful fruit. you must gather it and bring it into your room and cut it open yourself very gently, and you must not open it when your father or anybody else is with you, but when you are quite alone; for i shall be in the fruit quite naked, without any clothes at all on." in the morning laili took her little dog's form, and disappeared in the garden.
prince majnun told all this to his father, who told him to do all the old woman had bidden him. in two days' time he and the wazir's son walked in the garden, and there they saw a large, lovely red fruit.
"oh!" said the prince, "i wonder shall i find my wife in that fruit."
husain mahamat wanted him to gather it and see, but he would not till he had told his father, who said, "that must be the fruit; go and gather it." so majnun went back and broke the fruit off its stalk; and he said to his father, "come with me to my room while i open it; i am afraid to open it alone, for perhaps i shall find a rakshas in it that will eat me."
"no," said king dantal; "remember, laili will be naked; you must go alone and do not be afraid if, after all, a rakshas is in the fruit, for i will stay outside the door, and you have only to call me with a loud voice, and i will come to you, so the rakshas will not be able to eat you."
then majnun took the fruit and began to cut it open tremblingly, for he shook with fear; and when he had cut it, out stepped laili, young and far more beautiful than she had ever been. at the sight of her extreme beauty, majnun fell backwards fainting on the floor.
laili took off his turban and wound it all round herself like a sari (for she had no clothes at all on), and then she called king dantal, and said to him sadly, "why has majnun fallen down like this? why will he not speak to me? he never used to be afraid of me; and he has seen me so many, many times."
king dantal answered, "it is because you are so beautiful. you are far, far more beautiful than you ever were. but he will be very happy directly." then the king got some water, and they bathed majnun's face and gave him some to drink, and he sat up again.
then laili said, "why did you faint? did you not see i am laili?"
"oh!" said prince majnun, "i see you are laili come back to me, but your eyes have grown so wonderfully beautiful, that i fainted when i saw them." then they were all very happy, and king dantal had all the drums in the place beaten, and had all the musical instruments played on, and they made a grand wedding-feast, and gave presents to the servants, and rice and quantities of rupees to the fakirs.
after some time had passed very happily, prince majnun and his wife went out to eat the air. they rode on the same horse, and had only a groom with them. they came to another kingdom, to a beautiful garden.
"we must go into that garden and see it," said majnun.
"no, no," said laili; "it belongs to a bad raja, chumman basa, a very wicked man." but majnun insisted on going in, and in spite of all laili could say, he got off the horse to look at the flowers. now, as he was looking at the flowers, laili saw chumman basa coming towards them, and she read in his eyes that he meant to kill her husband and seize her. so she said to majnun, "come, come, let us go; do not go near that bad man. i see in his eyes, and i feel in my heart, that he will kill you to seize me."
"what nonsense," said majnun. "i believe he is a very good raja.
anyhow, i am so near to him that i could not get away."
"well," said laili, "it is better that you should be killed than i, for if i were to be killed a second time, khuda would not give me my life again; but i can bring you to life if you are killed." now chumman basa had come quite near, and seemed very pleasant, so thought prince majnun; but when he was speaking to majnun, he drew his scimitar and cut off the prince's head at one blow.
laili sat quite still on her horse, and as the raja came towards her she said, "why did you kill my husband?"
"because i want to take you," he answered.
"you cannot," said laili.
"yes, i can," said the raja.
"take me, then," said laili to chumman basa; so he came quite close and put out his hand to take hers to lift her off her horse. but she put her hand in her pocket and pulled out a tiny knife, only as long as her hand was broad, and this knife unfolded itself in one instant till it was such a length! and then laili made a great sweep with her arm and her long, long knife, and off came chumman basa's head at one touch.
then laili slipped down off her horse, and she went to majnun's dead body, and she cut her little finger inside her hand straight down from the top of her nail to her palm, and out of this gushed blood like healing medicine. then she put majnun's head on his shoulders, and smeared her healing blood all over the wound, and majnun woke up and said, "what a delightful sleep i have had! why, i feel as if i had slept for years!" then he got up and saw the raja's dead body by laili's horse.
"what's that?" said majnun.
"that is the wicked raja who killed you to seize me, just as i said he would."
"who killed him?" asked majnun.
"i did," answered laili, "and it was i who brought you to life."
"do bring the poor man to life if you know how to do so," said majnun.
"no," said laili, "for he is a wicked man, and will try to do you harm." but majnun asked her for such a long time, and so earnestly to bring the wicked raja to life, that at least she said, "jump up on the horse, then, and go far away with the groom."
"what will you do," said majnun, "if i leave you? i cannot leave you."
"i will take care of myself," said laili; "but this man is so wicked, he may kill you again if you are near him." so majnun got up on the horse, and he and the groom went a long way off and waited for laili.
then she set the wicked raja's head straight on his shoulders, and she squeezed the wound in her finger till a little blood-medicine came out of it. then she smeared this over the place where her knife had passed, and just as she saw the raja opening his eyes, she began to run, and she ran, and ran so fast, that she outran the raja, who tried to catch her; and she sprang up on the horse behind her husband, and they rode so fast, so fast, till they reached king dantal's palace.
there prince majnun told everything to his father, who was horrified and angry. "how lucky for you that you have such a wife," he said.
"why did you not do what she told you? but for her, you would be now dead." then he made a great feast out of gratitude for his son's safety, and gave many, many rupees to the fakirs. and he made so much of laili. he loved her dearly; he could not do enough for her. then he built a splendid palace for her and his son, with a great deal of ground about it, and lovely gardens, and gave them great wealth, and heaps of servants to wait on them. but he would not allow any but their servants to enter their gardens and palace, and he would not allow majnun to go out of them, nor laili; "for," said king dantal, "laili is so beautiful, that perhaps some one may kill my son to take her away."
the tiger, the brahman, and the jackal
once upon a time, a tiger was caught in a trap. he tried in vain to get out through the bars, and rolled and bit with rage and grief when he failed.
by chance a poor brahman came by. "let me out of this cage, oh pious one!" cried the tiger.
"nay, my friend," replied the brahman mildly, "you would probably eat me if i did."
"not at all!" swore the tiger with many oaths; "on the contrary, i should be for ever grateful, and serve you as a slave!"
now when the tiger sobbed and sighed and wept and swore, the pious brahman's heart softened, and at last he consented to open the door of the cage. out popped the tiger, and, seizing the poor man, cried, "what a fool you are! what is to prevent my eating you now, for after being cooped up so long i am just terribly hungry!"
in vain the brahman pleaded for his life; the most he could gain was a promise to abide by the decision of the first three things he chose to question as to the justice of the tiger's action.
so the brahman first asked a pipal tree what it thought of the matter, but the pipal tree replied coldly, "what have you to complain about? don't i give shade and shelter to every one who passes by, and don't they in return tear down my branches to feed their cattle? don't whimper be a man!"
then the brahman, sad at heart, went further afield till he saw a buffalo turning a well-wheel; but he fared no better from it, for it answered, "you are a fool to expect gratitude! look at me! whilst i gave milk they fed me on cotton-seed and oil-cake, but now i am dry they yoke me here, and give me refuse as fodder!"
the brahman, still more sad, asked the road to give him its opinion.
"my dear sir," said the road, "how foolish you are to expect anything else! here am i, useful to everybody, yet all, rich and poor, great and small, trample on me as they go past, giving me nothing but the ashes of their pipes and the husks of their grain!"
on this the brahman turned back sorrowfully, and on the way he met a jackal, who called out, "why, what's the matter, mr. brahman? you look as miserable as a fish out of water!"
the brahman told him all that had occurred. "how very confusing!" said the jackal, when the recital was ended; "would you mind telling me over again, for everything has got so mixed up?"
the brahman told it all over again, but the jackal shook his head in a distracted sort of way, and still could not understand.
"it's very odd," said he, sadly, "but it all seems to go in at one ear and out at the other! i will go to the place where it all happened, and then perhaps i shall be able to give a judgment."
so they returned to the cage, by which the tiger was waiting for the brahman, and sharpening his teeth and claws.
"you've been away a long time!" growled the savage beast, "but now let us begin our dinner."
"our dinner!" thought the wretched brahman, as his knees knocked together with fright; "what a remarkably delicate way of putting it!"
"give me five minutes, my lord!" he pleaded, "in order that i may explain matters to the jackal here, who is somewhat slow in his wits."
the tiger consented, and the brahman began the whole story over again, not missing a single detail, and spinning as long a yarn as possible.
"oh, my poor brain! oh, my poor brain!" cried the jackal, wringing its paws. "let me see! how did it all begin? you were in the cage, and the tiger came walking by "
"pooh!" interrupted the tiger, "what a fool you are! i was in the cage."
"of course!" cried the jackal, pretending to tremble with fright; "yes! i was in the cage no i wasn't dear! dear! where are my wits?
let me see the tiger was in the brahman, and the cage came walking by no, that's not it, either! well, don't mind me, but begin your dinner, for i shall never understand!"
"yes, you shall!" returned the tiger, in a rage at the jackal's stupidity; "i'll make you understand! look here i am the tiger "
"yes, my lord!"
"and that is the brahman "
"yes, my lord!"
"and that is the cage "
"yes, my lord!"
"and i was in the cage do you understand?"
"yes no please, my lord "
"well?" cried the tiger impatiently.
"please, my lord! how did you get in?"
"how! why in the usual way, of course!"
"oh, dear me! my head is beginning to whirl again! please don't be angry, my lord, but what is the usual way?"
at this the tiger lost patience, and, jumping into the cage, cried, "this way! now do you understand how it was?"
"perfectly!" grinned the jackal, as he dexterously shut the door, "and if you will permit me to say so, i think matters will remain as they were!"
the soothsayer's son
a soothsayer when on his deathbed wrote out the horoscope of his second son, whose name was gangazara, and bequeathed it to him as his only property, leaving the whole of his estate to his eldest son. the second son thought over the horoscope, and said to himself:
"alas! am i born to this only in the world? the sayings of my father never failed. i have seen them prove true to the last word while he was living; and how has he fixed my horoscope! 'from my birth poverty!' nor is that my only fate. 'for ten years, imprisonment' a fate harder than poverty; and what comes next? 'death on the sea-shore'; which means that i must die away from home, far from friends and relatives on a sea-coast. now comes the most curious part of the horoscope, that i am to 'have some happiness afterwards!' what this happiness is, is an enigma to me."
thus thought he, and after all the funeral obsequies of his father were over, took leave of his elder brother, and started for benares.
he went by the middle of the deccan, avoiding both the coasts, and went on journeying and journeying for weeks and months, till at last he reached the vindhya mountains. while passing that desert he had to journey for a couple of days through a sandy plain, with no signs of life or vegetation. the little store of provision with which he was provided for a couple of days, at last was exhausted. the chombu, which he carried always full, filling it with the sweet water from the flowing rivulet or plenteous tank, he had exhausted in the heat of the desert. there was not a morsel in his hand to eat; nor a drop of water to drink. turn his eyes wherever he might he found a vast desert, out of which he saw no means of escape. still he thought within himself, "surely my father's prophecy never proved untrue. i must survive this calamity to find my death on some sea-coast." so thought he, and this thought gave him strength of mind to walk fast and try to find a drop of water somewhere to slake his dry throat.
at last he succeeded; heaven threw in his way a ruined well. he thought he could collect some water if he let down his chombu with the string that he always carried noosed to the neck of it. accordingly he let it down; it went some way and stopped, and the following words came from the well: "oh, relieve me! i am the king of tigers, dying here of hunger. for the last three days i have had nothing. fortune has sent you here. if you assist me now you will find a sure help in me throughout your life. do not think that i am a beast of prey. when you have become my deliverer i will never touch you. pray, kindly lift me up." gangazara thought: "shall i take him out or not? if i take him out he may make me the first morsel of his hungry mouth. no; that he will not do. for my father's prophecy never came untrue. i must die on a sea coast, and not by a tiger." thus thinking, he asked the tiger-king to hold tight to the vessel, which he accordingly did, and he lifted him up slowly. the tiger reached the top of the well and felt himself on safe ground. true to his word, he did no harm to gangazara. on the other hand, he walked round his patron three times, and standing before him, humbly spoke the following words: "my life-giver, my benefactor! i shall never forget this day, when i regained my life through your kind hands. in return for this kind assistance i pledge my oath to stand by you in all calamities.
whenever you are in any difficulty just think of me. i am there with you ready to oblige you by all the means that i can. to tell you briefly how i came in here: three days ago i was roaming in yonder forest, when i saw a goldsmith passing through it. i chased him. he, finding it impossible to escape my claws, jumped into this well, and is living to this moment in the very bottom of it. i also jumped in, but found myself on the first ledge of the well; he is on the last and fourth ledge. in the second lives a serpent half-famished with hunger.
on the third lies a rat, also half-famished, and when you again begin to draw water these may request you first to release them. in the same way the goldsmith also may ask you. i beg you, as your bosom friend, never assist that wretched man, though he is your relation as a human being. goldsmiths are never to be trusted. you can place more faith in me, a tiger, though i feast sometimes upon men, in a serpent, whose sting makes your blood cold the very next moment, or in a rat, which does a thousand pieces of mischief in your house. but never trust a goldsmith. do not release him; and if you do, you shall surely repent of it one day or other." thus advising, the hungry tiger went away without waiting for an answer.
gangazara thought several times of the eloquent way in which the tiger spoke, and admired his fluency of speech. but still his thirst was not quenched. so he let down his vessel again, which was now caught hold of by the serpent, who addressed him thus: "oh, my protector! lift me up. i am the king of serpents, and the son of adisesha, who is now pining away in agony for my disappearance. release me now. i shall ever remain your servant, remember your assistance, and help you throughout life in all possible ways. oblige me: i am dying."
gangazara, calling again to mind the "death on the sea-shore" of the prophecy lifted him up. he, like the tiger-king, walked round him thrice, and prostrating himself before him spoke thus: "oh, my life-giver, my father, for so i must call you, as you have given me another birth. i was three days ago basking myself in the morning sun, when i saw a rat running before me. i chased him. he fell into this well. i followed him, but instead of falling on the third storey where he is now lying, i fell into the second. i am going away now to see my father. whenever you are in any difficulty just think of me. i will be there by your side to assist you by all possible means." so saying, the nagaraja glided away in zigzag movements, and was out of sight in a moment.
the poor son of the soothsayer, who was now almost dying of thirst, let down his vessel for a third time. the rat caught hold of it, and without discussing he lifted up the poor animal at once. but it would not go away without showing its gratitude: "oh, life of my life! my benefactor! i am the king of rats. whenever you are in any calamity just think of me. i will come to you, and assist you. my keen ears overheard all that the tiger-king told you about the goldsmith, who is in the fourth storey. it is nothing but a sad truth that goldsmiths ought never to be trusted. therefore, never assist him as you have done to us all. and if you do, you will suffer for it. i am hungry; let me go for the present." thus taking leave of his benefactor, the rat, too, ran away.
gangazara for a while thought upon the repeated advice given by the three animals about releasing the goldsmith: "what wrong would there be in my assisting him? why should i not release him also?" so thinking to himself, gangazara let down the vessel again. the goldsmith caught hold of it, and demanded help. the soothsayer's son had no time to lose; he was himself dying of thirst. therefore he lifted the goldsmith up, who now began his story. "stop for a while,"
said gangazara, and after quenching his thirst by letting down his vessel for the fifth time, still fearing that some one might remain in the well and demand his assistance, he listened to the goldsmith, who began as follows: "my dear friend, my protector, what a deal of nonsense these brutes have been talking to you about me; i am glad you have not followed their advice. i am just now dying of hunger. permit me to go away. my name is manikkasari. i live in the east main street of ujjaini, which is twenty kas to the south of this place, and so lies on your way when you return from benares. do not forget to come to me and receive my kind remembrances of your assistance, on your way back to your country." so saying, the goldsmith took his leave, and gangazara also pursued his way north after the above adventures.
he reached benares, and lived there for more than ten years, and quite forgot the tiger, serpent, rat, and goldsmith. after ten years of religious life, thoughts of home and of his brother rushed into his mind. "i have secured enough merit now by my religious observances.
let me return home." thus thought gangazara within himself, and very soon he was on his way back to his country. remembering the prophecy of his father he returned by the same way by which he went to benares ten years before. while thus retracing his steps he reached the ruined well where he had released the three brute kings and the goldsmith. at once the old recollections rushed into his mind, and he thought of the tiger to test his fidelity. only a moment passed, and the tiger-king came running before him carrying a large crown in his mouth, the glitter of the diamonds of which for a time outshone even the bright rays of the sun. he dropped the crown at his life-giver's feet, and, putting aside all his pride, humbled himself like a pet cat to the strokes of his protector, and began in the following words: "my life-giver! how is it that you have forgotten me, your poor servant, for such a long time? i am glad to find that i still occupy a corner in your mind. i can never forget the day when i owed my life to your lotus hands. i have several jewels with me of little value. this crown, being the best of all, i have brought here as a single ornament of great value, which you can carry with you and dispose of in your own country." gangazara looked at the crown, examined it over and over, counted and recounted the gems, and thought within himself that he would become the richest of men by separating the diamonds and gold, and selling them in his own country. he took leave of the tiger-king, and after his disappearance thought of the kings of serpents and rats, who came in their turn with their presents, and after the usual greetings and exchange of words took their leave.
gangazara was extremely delighted at the faithfulness with which the brute beasts behaved, and went on his way to the south. while going along he spoke to himself thus: "these beasts have been very faithful in their assistance. much more, therefore, must manikkasari be faithful. i do not want anything from him now. if i take this crown with me as it is, it occupies much space in my bundle. it may also excite the curiosity of some robbers on the way. i will go now to ujjaini on my way. manikkasari requested me to see him without failure on my return journey. i shall do so, and request him to have the crown melted, the diamonds and gold separated. he must do that kindness at least for me. i shall then roll up these diamonds and gold ball in my rags, and wend my way homewards." thus thinking and thinking, he reached ujjaini. at once he inquired for the house of his goldsmith friend, and found him without difficulty. manikkasari was extremely delighted to find on his threshold him who ten years before, notwithstanding the advice repeatedly given him by the sage-looking tiger, serpent, and rat, had relieved him from the pit of death.
gangazara at once showed him the crown that he received from the tiger-king, told him how he got it, and requested his kind assistance to separate the gold and diamonds. manikkasari agreed to do so, and meanwhile asked his friend to rest himself for a while to have his bath and meals; and gangazara, who was very observant of his religious ceremonies, went direct to the river to bathe.
how came the crown in the jaws of the tiger? the king of ujjaini had a week before gone with all his hunters on a hunting expedition. all of a sudden the tiger-king started from the wood, seized the king, and vanished.
when the king's attendants informed the prince about the death of his father he wept and wailed, and gave notice that he would give half of his kingdom to any one who should bring him news about the murderer of his father. the goldsmith knew full well that it was a tiger that killed the king, and not any hunter's hands, since he had heard from gangazara how he obtained the crown. still, he resolved to denounce gangazara as the king's murderer, so, hiding the crown under his garments, he flew to the palace. he went before the prince and informed him that the assassin was caught, and placed the crown before him. the prince took it into his hands, examined it, and at once gave half the kingdom to manikkasari, and then inquired about the murderer.
"he is bathing in the river, and is of such and such appearance," was the reply. at once four armed soldiers flew to the river, and bound the poor brahman hand and foot, while he, sitting in meditation, was without any knowledge of the fate that hung over him. they brought gangazara to the presence of the prince, who turned his face away from the supposed murderer, and asked his soldiers to throw him into a dungeon. in a minute, without knowing the cause, the poor brahman found himself in the dark dungeon.
it was a dark cellar underground, built with strong stone walls, into which any criminal guilty of a capital offence was ushered to breathe his last there without food and drink. such was the cellar into which gangazara was thrust. what were his thoughts when he reached that place? "it is of no use to accuse either the goldsmith or the prince now. we are all the children of fate. we must obey her commands. this is but the first day of my father's prophecy. so far his statement is true. but how am i going to pass ten years here? perhaps without anything to sustain life i may drag on my existence for a day or two.
but how pass ten years? that cannot be, and i must die. before death comes let me think of my faithful brute friends."
so pondered gangazara in the dark cell underground, and at that moment thought of his three friends. the tiger-king, serpent-king, and rat-king assembled at once with their armies at a garden near the dungeon, and for a while did not know what to do. they held their council, and decided to make an underground passage from the inside of a ruined well to the dungeon. the rat raja issued an order at once to that effect to his army. they, with their teeth, bored the ground a long way to the walls of the prison. after reaching it they found that their teeth could not work on the hard stones. the bandicoots were then specially ordered for the business; they, with their hard teeth, made a small slit in the wall for a rat to pass and repass without difficulty. thus a passage was effected.
the rat raja entered first to condole with his protector on his misfortune, and undertook to supply his protector with provisions.
"whatever sweetmeats or bread are prepared in any house, one and all of you must try to bring whatever you can to our benefactor. whatever clothes you find hanging in a house, cut down, dip the pieces in water, and bring the wet bits to our benefactor. he will squeeze them and gather water for drink! and the bread and sweetmeats shall form his food." having issued these orders, the king of the rats took leave of gangazara. they, in obedience to their king's order, continued to supply him with provisions and water.
the snake-king said: "i sincerely condole with you in your calamity; the tiger-king also fully sympathises with you, and wants me to tell you so, as he cannot drag his huge body here as we have done with our small ones. the king of the rats has promised to do his best to provide you with food. we would now do what we can for your release.
from this day we shall issue orders to our armies to oppress all the subjects of this kingdom. the deaths by snake-bite and tigers shall increase a hundredfold from this day, and day by day it shall continue to increase till your release. whenever you hear people near you, you had better bawl out so as to be heard by them: 'the wretched prince imprisoned me on the false charge of having killed his father, while it was a tiger that killed him. from that day these calamities have broken out in his dominions. if i were released i would save all by my powers of healing poisonous wounds and by incantations.' some one may report this to the king, and if he knows it, you will obtain your liberty." thus comforting his protector in trouble, he advised him to pluck up courage, and took leave of him. from that day tigers and serpents, acting under the orders of their kings, united in killing as many persons and cattle as possible. every day people were carried away by tigers or bitten by serpents. thus passed months and years.
gangazara sat in the dark cellar, without the sun's light falling upon him, and feasted upon the breadcrumbs and sweetmeats that the rats so kindly supplied him with. these delicacies had completely changed his body into a red, stout, huge, unwieldy mass of flesh. thus passed full ten years, as prophesied in the horoscope.
ten complete years rolled away in close imprisonment. on the last evening of the tenth year one of the serpents got into the bed-chamber of the princess and sucked her life. she breathed her last. she was the only daughter of the king. the king at once sent for all the snake-bite curers. he promised half his kingdom and his daughter's hand to him who would restore her to life. now a servant of the king who had several times overheard gangazara's cries, reported the matter to him. the king at once ordered the cell to be examined. there was the man sitting in it. how had he managed to live so long in the cell?
some whispered that he must be a divine being. thus they discussed, while they brought gangazara to the king.
the king no sooner saw gangazara than he fell on the ground. he was struck by the majesty and grandeur of his person. his ten years'
imprisonment in the deep cell underground had given a sort of lustre to his body. his hair had first to be cut before his face could be seen. the king begged forgiveness for his former fault, and requested him to revive his daughter.
"bring me within an hour all the corpses of men and cattle, dying and dead, that remain unburnt or unburied within the range of your dominions; i shall revive them all," were the only words that gangazara spoke.
cartloads of corpses of men and cattle began to come in every minute.
even graves, it is said, were broken open, and corpses buried a day or two before were taken out and sent for their revival. as soon as all were ready, gangazara took a vessel full of water and sprinkled it over them all, thinking only of his snake-king and tiger-king. all rose up as if from deep slumber, and went to their respective homes.
the princess, too, was restored to life. the joy of the king knew no bounds. he cursed the day on which he imprisoned him, blamed himself for having believed the word of a goldsmith, and offered him the hand of his daughter and the whole kingdom, instead of half, as he promised. gangazara would not accept anything, but asked the king to assemble all his subjects in a wood near the town. "i shall there call in all the tigers and serpents, and give them a general order."
when the whole town was assembled, just at the dusk of evening, gangazara sat dumb for a moment, and thought upon the tiger king and the serpent king, who came with all their armies. people began to take to their heels at the sight of tigers. gangazara assured them of safety, and stopped them.
the grey light of the evening, the pumpkin colour of gangazara, the holy ashes scattered lavishly over his body, the tigers and snakes humbling themselves at his feet, gave him the true majesty of the god gangazara. for who else by a single word could thus command vast armies of tigers and serpents, said some among the people. "care not for it; it may be by magic. that is not a great thing. that he revived cartloads of corpses shows him to be surely gangazara," said others.
"why should you, my children, thus trouble these poor subjects of ujjaini? reply to me, and henceforth desist from your ravages." thus said the soothsayer's son, and the following reply came from the king of the tigers: "why should this base king imprison your honour, believing the mere word of a goldsmith that your honour killed his father? all the hunters told him that his father was carried away by a tiger. i was the messenger of death sent to deal the blow on his neck.
i did it, and gave the crown to your honour. the prince makes no inquiry, and at once imprisons your honour. how can we expect justice from such a stupid king as that? unless he adopt a better standard of justice we will go on with our destruction."
the king heard, cursed the day on which he believed in the word of a goldsmith, beat his head, tore his hair, wept and wailed for his crime, asked a thousand pardons, and swore to rule in a just way from that day. the serpent-king and tiger-king also promised to observe their oath as long as justice prevailed, and took their leave. the goldsmith fled for his life. he was caught by the soldiers of the king, and was pardoned by the generous gangazara, whose voice now reigned supreme. all returned to their homes.
the king again pressed gangazara to accept the hand of his daughter.
he agreed to do so, not then, but some time afterwards. he wished to go and see his elder brother first, and then to return and marry the princess. the king agreed; and gangazara left the city that very day on his way home.
it so happened that unwittingly he took a wrong road, and had to pass near a sea-coast. his elder brother was also on his way up to benares by that very same route. they met and recognised each other, even at a distance. they flew into each other's arms. both remained still for a time almost unconscious with joy. the pleasure of gangazara was so great that he died of joy.
the elder brother was a devout worshipper of ganesa. that was a friday, a day very sacred to that god. the elder brother took the corpse to the nearest ganesa temple and called upon him. the god came, and asked him what he wanted. "my poor brother is dead and gone; and this is his corpse. kindly keep it in your charge till i finish worshipping you. if i leave it anywhere else the devils may snatch it away when i am absent worshipping you; after finishing the rites i shall burn him." thus said the elder brother, and, giving the corpse to the god ganesa, he went to prepare himself for that deity's ceremonials. ganesa made over the corpse to his ganas, asking them to watch over it carefully. but instead of that they devoured it.
the elder brother, after finishing the puja, demanded his brother's corpse of the god. the god called his ganas, who came to the front blinking, and fearing the anger of their master. the god was greatly enraged. the elder brother was very angry. when the corpse was not forthcoming he cuttingly remarked, "is this, after all, the return for my deep belief in you? you are unable even to return my brother's corpse." ganesa was much ashamed at the remark. so he, by his divine power, gave him a living gangazara instead of the dead corpse. thus was the second son of the soothsayer restored to life.
the brothers had a long talk about each other's adventures. they both went to ujjaini, where gangazara married the princess, and succeeded to the throne of that kingdom. he reigned for a long time, conferring several benefits upon his brother. and so the horoscope was fully fulfilled.
harisarman
there was a certain brahman in a certain village, named harisarman. he was poor and foolish and in evil case for want of employment, and he had very many children, that he might reap the fruit of his misdeeds in a former life. he wandered about begging with his family, and at last he reached a certain city, and entered the service of a rich householder called sthuladatta. his sons became keepers of sthuladatta's cows and other property, and his wife a servant to him, and he himself lived near his house, performing the duty of an attendant. one day there was a feast on account of the marriage of the daughter of sthuladatta, largely attended by many friends of the bridegroom, and merry-makers. harisarman hoped that he would be able to fill himself up to the throat with ghee and flesh and other dainties, and get the same for his family, in the house of his patron.
while he was anxiously expecting to be fed, no one thought of him.
then he was distressed at getting nothing to eat, and he said to his wife at night, "it is owing to my poverty and stupidity that i am treated with such disrespect here; so i will pretend by means of an artifice to possess a knowledge of magic, so that i may become an object of respect to this sthuladatta; so, when you get an opportunity, tell him that i possess magical knowledge." he said this to her, and after turning the matter over in his mind, while people were asleep he took away from the house of sthuladatta a horse on which his master's son-in-law rode. he placed it in concealment at some distance, and in the morning the friends of the bridegroom could not find the horse, though they searched in every direction. then, while sthuladatta was distressed at the evil omen, and searching for the thieves who had carried off the horse, the wife of harisarman came and said to him, "my husband is a wise man, skilled in astrology and magical sciences; he can get the horse back for you; why do you not ask him?" when sthuladatta heard that, he called harisarman, who said, "yesterday i was forgotten, but to-day, now the horse is stolen, i am called to mind," and sthuladatta then propitiated the brahman with these words "i forgot you, forgive me" and asked him to tell him who had taken away their horse. then harisarman drew all kinds of pretended diagrams, and said: "the horse has been placed by thieves on the boundary line south from this place. it is concealed there, and before it is carried off to a distance, as it will be at close of day, go quickly and bring it." when they heard that, many men ran and brought the horse quickly, praising the discernment of harisarman.
then harisarman was honoured by all men as a sage, and dwelt there in happiness, honoured by sthuladatta.
now, as days went on, much treasure, both of gold and jewels, had been stolen by a thief from the palace of the king. as the thief was not known, the king quickly summoned harisarman on account of his reputation for knowledge of magic. and he, when summoned, tried to gain time, and said, "i will tell you to-morrow," and then he was placed in a chamber by the king, and carefully guarded. and he was sad because he had pretended to have knowledge. now in that palace there was a maid named jihva (which means tongue), who, with the assistance of her brother, had stolen that treasure from the interior of the palace. she, being alarmed at harisarman's knowledge, went at night and applied her ear to the door of that chamber in order to find out what he was about. and harisarman, who was alone inside, was at that very moment blaming his own tongue, that had made a vain assumption of knowledge. he said: "o tongue, what is this that you have done through your greediness? wicked one, you will soon receive punishment in full." when jihva heard this, she thought, in her terror, that she had been discovered by this wise man, and she managed to get in where he was, and falling at his feet, she said to the supposed wizard:
"brahman, here i am, that jihva whom you have discovered to be the thief of the treasure, and after i took it i buried it in the earth in a garden behind the palace, under a pomegranate tree. so spare me, and receive the small quantity of gold which is in my possession."
when harisarman heard that, he said to her proudly: "depart, i know all this; i know the past, present and future; but i will not denounce you, being a miserable creature that has implored my protection. but whatever gold is in your possession you must give back to me." when he said this to the maid, she consented, and departed quickly. but harisarman reflected in his astonishment: "fate brings about, as if in sport, things impossible, for when calamity was so near, who would have thought chance would have brought us success? while i was blaming my jihva, the thief jihva suddenly flung herself at my feet. secret crimes manifest themselves by means of fear." thus thinking, he passed the night happily in the chamber. and in the morning he brought the king, by some skilful parade of pretended knowledge into the garden, and led him up to the treasure, which was buried under the pomegranate tree, and said that the thief had escaped with a part of it. then the king was pleased, and gave him the revenue of many villages.
but the minister, named devajnanin, whispered in the king's ear: "how can a man possess such knowledge unattainable by men, without having studied the books of magic; you may be certain that this is a specimen of the way he makes a dishonest livelihood, by having a secret intelligence with thieves. it will be much better to test him by some new artifice." then the king of his own accord brought a covered pitcher into which he had thrown a frog, and said to harisarman, "brahman, if you can guess what there is in this pitcher, i will do you great honour to-day." when the brahman harisarman heard that, he thought that his last hour had come, and he called to mind the pet name of "froggie" which his father had given him in his childhood in sport, and, impelled by luck, he called to himself by his pet name, lamenting his hard fate, and suddenly called out: "this is a fine pitcher for you, froggie; it will soon become the swift destroyer of your helpless self." the people there, when they heard him say that, raised a shout of applause, because his speech chimed in so well with the object presented to him, and murmured, "ah! a great sage, he knows even about the frog!" then the king, thinking that this was all due to knowledge of divination, was highly delighted, and gave harisarman the revenue of more villages, with gold, an umbrella, and state carriages of all kinds. so harisarman prospered in the world.
the charmed ring
a merchant started his son in life with three hundred rupees, and bade him go to another country and try his luck in trade. the son took the money and departed. he had not gone far before he came across some herdsmen quarrelling over a dog, that some of them wished to kill.
"please do not kill the dog," pleaded the young and tender-hearted fellow; "i will give you one hundred rupees for it." then and there, of course, the bargain was concluded, and the foolish fellow took the dog, and continued his journey. he next met with some people fighting about a cat. some of them wanted to kill it, but others not. "oh!
please do not kill it," said he; "i will give you one hundred rupees for it." of course they at once gave him the cat and took the money.
he went on till he reached a village, where some folk were quarrelling over a snake that had just been caught. some of them wished to kill it, but others did not. "please do not kill the snake," said he; "i will give you one hundred rupees." of course the people agreed, and were highly delighted.
what a fool the fellow was! what would he do now that all his money was gone? what could he do except return to his father? accordingly he went home.
"you fool! you scamp!" exclaimed his father when he had heard how his son had wasted all the money that had been given to him. "go and live in the stables and repent of your folly. you shall never again enter my house."
so the young man went and lived in the stables. his bed was the grass spread for the cattle, and his companions were the dog, the cat, and the snake, which he had purchased so dearly. these creatures got very fond of him, and would follow him about during the day, and sleep by him at night; the cat used to sleep at his feet, the dog at his head, and the snake over his body, with its head hanging on one side and its tail on the other.
one day the snake in course of conversation said to its master, "i am the son of raja indrasha. one day, when i had come out of the ground to drink the air, some people seized me, and would have slain me had you not most opportunely arrived to my rescue. i do not know how i shall ever be able to repay you for your great kindness to me. would that you knew my father! how glad he would be to see his son's preserver!"
"where does he live? i should like to see him, if possible," said the young man.
"well said!" continued the snake. "do you see yonder mountain? at the bottom of that mountain there is a sacred spring. if you will come with me and dive into that spring, we shall both reach my father's country. oh! how glad he will be to see you! he will wish to reward you, too. but how can he do that? however, you may be pleased to accept something at his hand. if he asks you what you would like, you would, perhaps, do well to reply, 'the ring on your right hand, and the famous pot and spoon which you possess.' with these in your possession, you would never need anything, for the ring is such that a man has only to speak to it, and immediately a beautiful furnished mansion will be provided for him, while the pot and the spoon will supply him with all manner of the rarest and most delicious foods."
attended by his three companions the man walked to the well and prepared to jump in, according to the snake's directions. "o master!"
exclaimed the cat and dog, when they saw what he was going to do.
"what shall we do? where shall we go?"
"wait for me here," he replied. "i am not going far. i shall not be long away." on saying this, he dived into the water and was lost to sight.
"now what shall we do?" said the dog to the cat.
"we must remain here," replied the cat, "as our master ordered. do not be anxious about food. i will go to the people's houses and get plenty of food for both of us." and so the cat did, and they both lived very comfortably till their master came again and joined them.
the young man and the snake reached their destination in safety; and information of their arrival was sent to the raja. his highness commanded his son and the stranger to appear before him. but the snake refused, saying that it could not go to its father till it was released from this stranger, who had saved it from a most terrible death, and whose slave it therefore was. then the raja went and embraced his son, and saluting the stranger welcomed him to his dominions. the young man stayed there a few days, during which he received the raja's right-hand ring, and the pot and spoon, in recognition of his highness's gratitude to him for having delivered his son. he then returned. on reaching the top of the spring he found his friends, the dog and the cat, waiting for him. they told one another all they had experienced since they had last seen each other, and were all very glad. afterwards they walked together to the river side, where it was decided to try the powers of the charmed ring and pot and spoon.
the merchant's son spoke to the ring, and immediately a beautiful house and a lovely princess with golden hair appeared. he spoke to the pot and spoon, also, and the most delicious dishes of food were provided for them. so he married the princess, and they lived very happily for several years, until one morning the princess, while arranging her toilet, put the loose hairs into a hollow bit of reed and threw them into the river that flowed along under the window. the reed floated on the water for many miles, and was at last picked up by the prince of that country, who curiously opened it and saw the golden hair. on finding it the prince rushed off to the palace, locked himself up in his room, and would not leave it. he had fallen desperately in love with the woman whose hair he had picked up, and refused to eat, or drink, or sleep, or move, till she was brought to him. the king, his father, was in great distress about the matter, and did not know what to do. he feared lest his son should die and leave him without an heir. at last he determined to seek the counsel of his aunt, who was an ogress. the old woman consented to help him, and bade him not to be anxious, as she felt certain that she would succeed in getting the beautiful woman for his son's wife.
she assumed the shape of a bee and went along buzzing, and buzzing, and buzzing. her keen sense of smell soon brought her to the beautiful princess, to whom she appeared as an old hag, holding in one hand a stick by way of support. she introduced herself to the beautiful princess and said, "i am your aunt, whom you have never seen before, because i left the country just after your birth." she also embraced and kissed the princess by way of adding force to her words. the beautiful princess was thoroughly deceived. she returned the ogress's embrace, and invited her to come and stay in the house as long as she could, and treated her with such honour and attention, that the ogress thought to herself, "i shall soon accomplish my errand." when she had been in the house three days, she began to talk of the charmed ring, and advised her to keep it instead of her husband, because the latter was constantly out shooting and on other such-like expeditions, and might lose it. accordingly the beautiful princess asked her husband for the ring, and he readily gave it to her.
the ogress waited another day before she asked to see the precious thing. doubting nothing, the beautiful princess complied, when the ogress seized the ring, and reassuming the form of a bee flew away with it to the palace, where the prince was lying nearly on the point of death. "rise up. be glad. mourn no more," she said to him. "the woman for whom you yearn will appear at your summons. see, here is the charm, whereby you may bring her before you." the prince was almost mad with joy when he heard these words, and was so desirous of seeing the beautiful princess, that he immediately spoke to the ring, and the house with its fair occupant descended in the midst of the palace garden. he at once entered the building, and telling the beautiful princess of his intense love, entreated her to be his wife. seeing no escape from the difficulty, she consented on the condition that he would wait one month for her.
meanwhile the merchant's son had returned from hunting and was terribly distressed not to find his house and wife. there was the place only, just as he knew it before he had tried the charmed ring which raja indrasha had given him. he sat down and determined to put an end to himself. presently the cat and dog came up. they had gone away and hidden themselves, when they saw the house and everything disappear. "o master!" they said, "stay your hand. your trial is great, but it can be remedied. give us one month, and we will go and try to recover your wife and house."
"go," said he, "and may the great god aid your efforts. bring back my wife, and i shall live."
so the cat and dog started off at a run, and did not stop till they reached the place whither their mistress and the house had been taken.
"we may have some difficulty here," said the cat. "look, the king has taken our master's wife and house for himself. you stay here. i will go to the house and try to see her." so the dog sat down, and the cat climbed up to the window of the room, wherein the beautiful princess was sitting, and entered. the princess recognised the cat, and informed it of all that had happened to her since she had left them.
"but is there no way of escape from the hands of these people?" she asked.
"yes," replied the cat, "if you can tell me where the charmed ring is."
"the ring is in the stomach of the ogress," she said.
"all right," said the cat, "i will recover it. if we once get it, everything is ours." then the cat descended the wall of the house, and went and laid down by a rat's hole and pretended she was dead. now at that time a great wedding chanced to be going on among the rat community of that place, and all the rats of the neighbourhood were assembled in that one particular mine by which the cat had lain down.
the eldest son of the king of the rats was about to be married. the cat got to know of this, and at once conceived the idea of seizing the bridegroom and making him render the necessary help. consequently, when the procession poured forth from the hole squealing and jumping in honour of the occasion, it immediately spotted the bridegroom and pounced down on him. "oh! let me go, let me go," cried the terrified rat. "oh! let him go," squealed all the company. "it is his wedding day."
"no, no," replied the cat. "not unless you do something for me.
listen. the ogress, who lives in that house with the prince and his wife, has swallowed a ring, which i very much want. if you will procure it for me, i will allow the rat to depart unharmed. if you do not, then your prince dies under my feet."
"very well, we agree," said they all. "nay, if we do not get the ring for you, devour us all."
this was rather a bold offer. however, they accomplished the thing. at midnight, when the ogress was sound asleep, one of the rats went to her bedside, climbed up on her face, and inserted its tail into her throat; whereupon the ogress coughed violently, and the ring came out and rolled on to the floor. the rat immediately seized the precious thing and ran off with it to its king, who was very glad, and went at once to the cat and released its son.
as soon as the cat received the ring, she started back with the dog to go and tell their master the good tidings. all seemed safe now. they had only to give the ring to him, and he would speak to it, and the house and beautiful princess would again be with them, and everything would go on as happily as before. "how glad master will be!" they thought, and ran as fast as their legs could carry them. now, on the way they had to cross a stream. the dog swam, and the cat sat on its back. now the dog was jealous of the cat, so he asked for the ring, and threatened to throw the cat into the water if it did not give it up; whereupon the cat gave up the ring. sorry moment, for the dog at once dropped it, and a fish swallowed it.
"oh! what shall i do? what shall i do?" said the dog.
"what is done is done," replied the cat. "we must try to recover it, and if we do not succeed we had better drown ourselves in this stream.
i have a plan. you go and kill a small lamb, and bring it here to me."
"all right," said the dog, and at once ran off. he soon came back with a dead lamb, and gave it to the cat. the cat got inside the lamb and lay down, telling the dog to go away a little distance and keep quiet.
not long after this a nadhar, a bird whose look can break the bones of a fish, came and hovered over the lamb, and eventually pounced down on it to carry it away. on this the cat came out and jumped on to the bird, and threatened to kill it if it did not recover the lost ring.
this was most readily promised by the nadhar, who immediately flew off to the king of the fishes, and ordered it to make inquiries and to restore the ring. the king of the fishes did so, and the ring was found and carried back to the cat.
"come along now; i have got the ring," said the cat to the dog.
"no, i will not," said the dog, "unless you let me have the ring. i can carry it as well as you. let me have it or i will kill you." so the cat was obliged to give up the ring. the careless dog very soon dropped it again. this time it was picked up and carried off by a kite.
"see, see, there it goes away to that big tree," the cat exclaimed.
"oh! oh! what have i done?" cried the dog.
"you foolish thing, i knew it would be so," said the cat. "but stop your barking, or you will frighten away the bird to some place where we shall not be able to trace it."
the cat waited till it was quite dark, and then climbed the tree, killed the kite, and recovered the ring. "come along," it said to the dog when it reached the ground. "we must make haste now. we have been delayed. our master will die from grief and suspense. come on."
the dog, now thoroughly ashamed of itself, begged the cat's pardon for all the trouble it had given. it was afraid to ask for the ring the third time, so they both reached their sorrowing master in safety and gave him the precious charm. in a moment his sorrow was turned into joy. he spoke to the ring, and his beautiful wife and house reappeared, and he and everybody were as happy as ever they could be.
the talkative tortoise
the future buddha was once born in a minister's family, when brahma-datta was reigning in benares; and when he grew up, he became the king's adviser in things temporal and spiritual.
now this king was very talkative; while he was speaking, others had no opportunity for a word. and the future buddha, wanting to cure this talkativeness of his, was constantly seeking for some means of doing so.
at that time there was living, in a pond in the himalaya mountains, a tortoise. two young hamsas, or wild ducks, who came to feed there, made friends with him. and one day, when they had become very intimate with him, they said to the tortoise:
"friend tortoise! the place where we live, at the golden cave on mount beautiful in the himalaya country, is a delightful spot. will you come there with us?"
"but how can i get there?"
"we can take you, if you can only hold your tongue, and will say nothing to anybody."
"oh! that i can do. take me with you."
"that's right," said they. and making the tortoise bite hold of a stick, they themselves took the two ends in their teeth, and flew up into the air.
seeing him thus carried by the hamsas, some villagers called out, "two wild ducks are carrying a tortoise along on a stick!" whereupon the tortoise wanted to say, "if my friends choose to carry me, what is that to you, you wretched slaves!" so just as the swift flight of the wild ducks had brought him over the king's palace in the city of benares, he let go of the stick he was biting, and falling in the open courtyard, split in two! and there arose a universal cry, "a tortoise has fallen in the open courtyard, and has split in two!"
the king, taking the future buddha, went to the place, surrounded by his courtiers; and looking at the tortoise, he asked the bodisat, "teacher! how comes he to be fallen here?"
the future buddha thought to himself, "long expecting, wishing to admonish the king, have i sought for some means of doing so. this tortoise must have made friends with the wild ducks; and they must have made him bite hold of the stick, and have flown up into the air to take him to the hills. but he, being unable to hold his tongue when he hears any one else talk, must have wanted to say something, and let go the stick; and so must have fallen down from the sky, and thus lost his life." and saying, "truly, o king! those who are called chatter-boxes people whose words have no end come to grief like this," he uttered these verses:
"verily the tortoise killed himself whilst uttering his voice; though he was holding tight the stick, by a word himself he slew.
"behold him then, o excellent by strength!
and speak wise words, not out of season.
you see how, by his talking overmuch, the tortoise fell into this wretched plight!"
the king saw that he was himself referred to, and said, "o teacher!
are you speaking of us?"
and the bodisat spake openly, and said, "o great king! be it thou, or be it any other, whoever talks beyond measure meets with some mishap like this."
and the king henceforth refrained himself, and became a man of few words.
a lac of rupees for a bit of advice
a poor blind brahman and his wife were dependent on their son for their subsistence. every day the young fellow used to go out and get what he could by begging. this continued for some time, till at last he became quite tired of such a wretched life, and determined to go and try his luck in another country. he informed his wife of his intention, and ordered her to manage somehow or other for the old people during the few months that he would be absent. he begged her to be industrious, lest his parents should be angry and curse him.
one morning he started with some food in a bundle, and walked on day after day, till he reached the chief city of the neighbouring country.
here he went and sat down by a merchant's shop and asked alms. the merchant inquired whence he had come, why he had come, and what was his caste; to which he replied that he was a brahman, and was wandering hither and thither begging a livelihood for himself and wife and parents. moved with pity for the man, the merchant advised him to visit the kind and generous king of that country, and offered to accompany him to the court. now at that time it happened that the king was seeking for a brahman to look after a golden temple which he had just had built. his majesty was very glad, therefore, when he saw the brahman and heard that he was good and honest. he at once deputed him to the charge of this temple, and ordered fifty kharwars of rice and one hundred rupees to be paid to him every year as wages.
two months after this, the brahman's wife, not having heard any news of her husband, left the house and went in quest of him. by a happy fate she arrived at the very place that he had reached, where she heard that every morning at the golden temple a golden rupee was given in the king's name to any beggar who chose to go for it. accordingly, on the following morning she went to the place and met her husband.
"why have you come here?" he asked. "why have you left my parents?
care you not whether they curse me and i die? go back immediately, and await my return."
"no, no," said the woman. "i cannot go back to starve and see your old father and mother die. there is not a grain of rice left in the house."
"o bhagawant!" exclaimed the brahman. "here, take this," he continued, scribbling a few lines on some paper, and then handing it to her, "and give it to the king. you will see that he will give you a lac of rupees for it." thus saying he dismissed her, and the woman left.
on this scrap of paper were written three pieces of advice first, if a person is travelling and reaches any strange place at night, let him be careful where he puts up, and not close his eyes in sleep, lest he close them in death. secondly, if a man has a married sister, and visits her in great pomp, she will receive him for the sake of what she can obtain from him; but if he comes to her in poverty, she will frown on him and disown him. thirdly, if a man has to do any work, he must do it himself, and do it with might and without fear.
on reaching her home the brahmani told her parents of her meeting with her husband, and what a valuable piece of paper he had given her; but not liking to go before the king herself, she sent one of her relations. the king read the paper, and ordering the man to be flogged, dismissed him. the next morning the brahmani took the paper, and while she was going along the road to the darbar reading it, the king's son met her, and asked what she was reading, whereupon she replied that she held in her hands a paper containing certain bits of advice, for which she wanted a lac of rupees. the prince asked her to show it to him, and when he had read it gave her a parwana for the amount, and rode on. the poor brahmani was very thankful. that day she laid in a great store of provisions, sufficient to last them all for a long time.
in the evening the prince related to his father the meeting with the woman, and the purchase of the piece of paper. he thought his father would applaud the act. but it was not so. the king was more angry than before, and banished his son from the country.
so the prince bade adieu to his mother and relations and friends, and rode off on his horse, whither he did not know. at nightfall he arrived at some place, where a man met him, and invited him to lodge at his house. the prince accepted the invitation, and was treated like a prince. matting was spread for him to squat on, and the best provisions set before him.
"ah!" thought he, as he lay down to rest, "here is a case for the first piece of advice that the brahmani gave me. i will not sleep to-night."
it was well that he thus resolved, for in the middle of the night the man rose up, and taking a sword in his hand, rushed to the prince with the intention of killing him. but he rose up and spoke.
"do not slay me," he said. "what profit would you get from my death?
if you killed me you would be sorry afterwards, like that man who killed his dog."
"what man? what dog?" he asked.
"i will tell you," said the prince, "if you will give me that sword."
so he gave him the sword, and the prince began his story:
"once upon a time there lived a wealthy merchant who had a pet dog. he was suddenly reduced to poverty, and had to part with his dog. he got a loan of five thousand rupees from a brother merchant, leaving the dog as a pledge, and with the money began business again. not long after this the other merchant's shop was broken into by thieves and completely sacked. there was hardly ten rupees' worth left in the place. the faithful dog, however, knew what was going on, and went and followed the thieves, and saw where they deposited the things, and then returned.
"in the morning there was great weeping and lamentation in the merchant's house when it was known what had happened. the merchant himself nearly went mad. meanwhile the dog kept on running to the door, and pulling at his master's shirt and paijamas, as though wishing him to go outside. at last a friend suggested that, perhaps, the dog knew something of the whereabouts of the things, and advised the merchant to follow its leadings. the merchant consented, and went after the dog right up to the very place where the thieves had hidden the goods. here the animal scraped and barked, and showed in various ways that the things were underneath. so the merchant and his friends dug about the place, and soon came upon all the stolen property.
nothing was missing. there was everything just as the thieves had taken them.
"the merchant was very glad. on returning to his house, he at once sent the dog back to its old master with a letter rolled under the collar, wherein he had written about the sagacity of the beast, and begged his friend to forget the loan and to accept another five thousand rupees as a present. when this merchant saw his dog coming back again, he thought, 'alas! my friend is wanting the money. how can i pay him? i have not had sufficient time to recover myself from my recent losses. i will slay the dog ere he reaches the threshold, and say that another must have slain it. thus there will be an end of my debt. no dog, no loan.' accordingly he ran out and killed the poor dog, when the letter fell out of its collar. the merchant picked it up and read it. how great was his grief and disappointment when he knew the facts of the case!
"beware," continued the prince, "lest you do that which afterwards you would give your life not to have done."
by the time the prince had concluded this story it was nearly morning, and he went away, after rewarding the man.
the prince then visited the country belonging to his brother-in-law.
he disguised himself as a jogi, and sitting down by a tree near the palace, pretended to be absorbed in worship. news of the man and of his wonderful piety reached the ears of the king. he felt interested in him, as his wife was very ill; and he had sought for hakims to cure her, but in vain. he thought that, perhaps, this holy man could do something for her. so he sent to him. but the jogi refused to tread the halls of a king, saying that his dwelling was the open air, and that if his majesty wished to see him he must come himself and bring his wife to the place. then the king took his wife and brought her to the jogi. the holy man bade her prostrate herself before him, and when she had remained in this position for about three hours, he told her to rise and go, for she was cured.
in the evening there was great consternation in the palace, because the queen had lost her pearl rosary, and nobody knew anything about it. at length some one went to the jogi, and found it on the ground by the place where the queen had prostrated herself. when the king heard this he was very angry, and ordered the jogi to be executed. this stern order, however, was not carried out, as the prince bribed the men and escaped from the country. but he knew that the second bit of advice was true.
clad in his own clothes, the prince was walking along one day when he saw a potter crying and laughing alternately with his wife and children. "o fool," said he, "what is the matter? if you laugh, why do you weep? if you weep, why do you laugh?"
"do not bother me," said the potter. "what does it matter to you?"
"pardon me," said the prince, "but i should like to know the reason."
"the reason is this, then," said the potter. "the king of this country has a daughter whom he is obliged to marry every day, because all her husbands die the first night of their stay with her. nearly all the young men of the place have thus perished, and our son will be called on soon. we laugh at the absurdity of the thing a potter's son marrying a princess, and we cry at the terrible consequence of the marriage. what can we do?"
"truly a matter for laughing and weeping. but weep no more," said the prince. "i will exchange places with your son, and will be married to the princess instead of him. only give me suitable garments, and prepare me for the occasion."
so the potter gave him beautiful raiment and ornaments, and the prince went to the palace. at night he was conducted to the apartment of the princess. "dread hour!" thought he; "am i to die like the scores of young men before me?" he clenched his sword with firm grip, and lay down on his bed, intending to keep awake all the night and see what would happen. in the middle of the night he saw two shahmars come out from the nostrils of the princess. they stole over towards him, intending to kill him, like the others who had been before him: but he was ready for them. he laid hold of his sword, and when the snakes reached his bed he struck at them and killed them. in the morning the king came as usual to inquire, and was surprised to hear his daughter and the prince talking gaily together. "surely," said he, "this man must be her husband, as he only can live with her."
"where do you come from? who are you?" asked the king, entering the room.
"o king!" replied the prince, "i am the son of a king who rules over such-and-such a country."
when he heard this the king was very glad, and bade the prince to abide in his palace, and appointed him his successor to the throne.
the prince remained at the palace for more than a year, and then asked permission to visit his own country, which was granted. the king gave him elephants, horses, jewels, and abundance of money for the expenses of the way and as presents for his father, and the prince started.
on the way he had to pass through the country belonging to his brother-in-law, whom we have already mentioned. report of his arrival reached the ears of the king, who came with rope-tied hands and haltered neck to do him homage. he most humbly begged him to stay at his palace, and to accept what little hospitality could be provided.
some of the sufferings of the pilgrims at the time are depicted on the preceding pages by the artist, also a few they escaped.
looking over the lives of our forefathers who came from england, i am not surprised that, with all the english people who have recently come to this country, i have never seen a forefather.
[footnote 2: see dr. dunn's family physician and horse doctor.]
chapter v.
drawbacks of being a colonist.
it was at this period in the history of our country that the colonists found themselves not only banished from all civilization, but compelled to fight an armed foe whose trade was war and whose music was the dying wail of a tortured enemy. unhampered by the exhausting efforts of industry, the indian, trained by centuries of war upon adjoining tribes, felt himself foot-loose and free to shoot the unprotected forefather from behind the very stump fence his victim had worked so hard to erect.
king philip, a demonetized sovereign, organized his red troops, and, carrying no haversacks, knapsacks, or artillery, fell upon the colonists and killed them, only to reappear at some remote point while the dead and wounded who fell at the first point were being buried or cared for by rude physicians.
what an era in the history of a country! gentlewomen whose homes had been in the peaceful hamlets of england lived and died in the face of a cruel foe, yet prepared the cloth and clothing for their families, fed them, and taught them to look to god in all times of trouble, to be prayerful in their daily lives, yet vigilant and ready to deal death to the general enemy. they were the mothers whose sons and grandsons laid the huge foundations of a great nation and cemented them with their blood.
at this time there was a line of battle three hundred miles in length.
on one side the white man went armed to the field or the prayer-meeting, shooting an indian on sight as he would a panther; on the other, a foe whose wife did the chores and hoed the scattering crops while he made war and extermination his joy by night and his prayer and life-long purpose by day.
finally, however, the victory came sluggishly to the brave and deserving. one thousand indians were killed at one pop, and their wigwams were burned. all their furniture and curios were burned in their wigwams, and some of their valuable dogs were holocausted. king philip was shot by a follower as he was looking under the throne for something, and peace was for the time declared.
about 1684 the colony of massachusetts, which had dared to open up a trade with the west indies, using its own vessels for that purpose, was hauled over the coals by the mother-country for violation of the navigation act, and an officer sent over to enforce the latter. the colonists defied him, and when he was speaking to them publicly in a tone of reprimand, he got an ovation in the way of eggs and codfish, both of which had been set aside for that purpose when the country was new, and therefore had an air of antiquity which cannot be successfully imitated.
as a result, the colony was made a royal appendage, and sir edmund andros, a political hack under james ii., was made governor of new england. he reigned under great difficulties for three years, and then suddenly found himself in jail. the jail was so arranged that he could not get out, and so the puritans now quietly resumed their old form of government.
this continued also for three years, when sir william phipps became governor under the crown, with one hundred and twenty pounds per annum and house-rent.
from this on to the revolution, massachusetts, maine, and nova scotia became a royal province. nova scotia is that way yet, and has to go to boston for her groceries.
the year 1692 is noted mostly for the salem excitement regarding witchcraft. the children of rev. mr. parris were attacked with some peculiar disease which would not yield to the soothing blisters and bleedings administered by the physicians of the old school, and so, not knowing exactly what to do about it, the doctors concluded that they were bewitched. then it was, of course, the duty of the courts and selectmen to hunt up the witches. this was naturally difficult.
fifty-five persons were tortured and twenty were hanged for being witches; which proves that the people of salem were fully abreast of the indians in intelligence, and that their gospel privileges had not given their charity and christian love such a boom as they should have done.
one can hardly be found now, even in salem, who believes in witchcraft; though the cape cod people, it is said, still spit on their bait. the belief in witchcraft in those days was not confined by any means to the colonists. sir matthew hale of england, one of the most enlightened judges of the mother-country, condemned a number of people for the offence, and is now engaged in doing road-work on the streets of the new jerusalem as a punishment for these acts done while on the woolsack.
blackstone himself, one of the dullest authors ever read by the writer of these lines, yet a skilled jurist, with a marvellous memory regarding justinian, said that, to deny witchcraft was to deny revelation.
"be you a witch?" asked one of the judges of massachusetts, according to the records now on file in the state-house at boston.
"no, your honor," was the reply.
"officer," said the court, taking a pinch of snuff, "take her out on the tennis-grounds and pull out her toe-nails with a pair of hot pincers, and then see what she says."
it was quite common to examine lady witches in the regular court and then adjourn to the tennis-court. a great many were ducked by order of the court and hanged up by the thumbs, in obedience to the customs of these people who came to america because they were persecuted.
human nature is the same even to this day. the writer grew up with an irishman who believed that when a man got wealthy enough to keep a carriage and coachman he ought to be assassinated and all his goods given to the poor. he now hires a coachman himself, having succeeded in new york city as a policeman; but the man who comes to assassinate him will find it almost impossible to obtain an audience with him.
if you wish to educate a man to be a successful oppressor, with a genius for introducing new horrors and novelties in pain, oppress him early in life and don't give him any reason for doing so. the idea that "god is love" was not popular in those days. the early settlers were so stern even with their own children that if the indian had not given the forefather something to attract his attention, the boy crop would have been very light.
even now the philosopher is led to ask, regarding the boasted freedom of america, why some measures are not taken to put large fly-screens over it.
chapter vi.
the episode of the charter oak.
the colonies of maine and new hampshire were so closely associated with that of massachusetts that their history up to 1820 was practically the same.
shortly after the landing of the pilgrims, say two years or thereabouts, gorges and mason obtained from england the grant of a large tract lying between the merrimac and kennebec rivers. this patent was afterwards dissolved, mason taking what is now new hampshire, and gorges taking maine. he afterwards sold the state to massachusetts for six thousand dollars. the growth of the state may be noticed since that time, for one county cost more than that last november.
in 1820 maine was separated from massachusetts. maine is noted for being the easternmost state in the union, and has been utilized by a number of eminent men as a birthplace. white-birch spools for thread, christmas-trees, and tamarack and spruce-gum are found in great abundance. it is the home of an industrious and peace-loving people.
bar harbor is a cool place to go to in summer-time and violate the liquor law of the state.
the dutch were first to claim connecticut. they built a trading-post at hartford, where they swapped bone collar-buttons with the indians for beaver-and otter-skins. traders from plymouth who went up the river were threatened by the dutch, but they pressed on and established a post at windsor.
in 1635, john steele led a company "out west" to hartford, and thomas hooker, a clergyman, followed with his congregation, driving their stock before them. hartford thus had quite a boom quite early in the seventeenth century. the dutch were driven out of the connecticut valley, and began to look towards new york.
soon after this the pequod war broke out. these indians had hoped to form an alliance with the narragansetts, but roger williams prevented this by seeing the narragansett chief personally. thus the puritans had coals of fire heaped on their heads by their gentle pastor, until the odor of burning hair could be detected as far away as new haven.
the pequods were thus compelled to fight alone, and captain mason by a coup d'état surrounded their camp before daylight and entered the palisades with the indian picket, who cried out "owanux! owanux!"
meaning "englishmen. englishmen." mason and his men killed these pequods and burned their lodges to the ground. there has never been a prosperous pequod lodge since. those who escaped to the forest were shot down like jack-rabbits as they fled, and there has been no pequoding done since that time.
the new haven colony was founded in 1638 by wealthy church members from abroad. they took the bible as their standard and statute. they had no other law. only church members could vote, which was different from the arrangements in new york city in after-years.
the connecticut colony had a regular constitution, said to have been the first written constitution ever adopted by the people, framed for the people by the people. it was at once prosperous, and soon bought out the saybrook colony.
in 1662 a royal charter was obtained which united the two above colonies and guaranteed to the people the rights agreed upon by them. it amounted to a duly-authenticated independence. a quarter of a century afterwards governor andros, in his other clothes and a reigning coat of red and gold trimmings, marched into the assembly and demanded this precious charter.
a long debate ensued, and, according to tradition, while the members of the assembly stood around the table taking a farewell look at the charter, one of the largest members of the house fell on the governor's breast and wept so copiously on his shirt-frill that harsh words were used by his excellency; a general quarrel ensued, the lights went out, and when they were relighted the charter was gone.
captain wadsworth had taken it and concealed it in a hollow tree, since called the charter oak. after andros was ejected from the boston office, the charter was brought out again, and business under it was resumed.
important documents, however, should not be, as a general thing, secreted in trees. the author once tried this while young, and when engaged to, or hoping to become engaged to, a dear one whose pa was a singularly coarse man and who hated a young man who came as a lover at his daughter's feet with nothing but a good education and his great big manly heart. he wanted a son-in-law with a brewery; and so he bribed the boys of the neighborhood to break up a secret correspondence between the two young people and bring the mail to him. this was the cause of many a heart-ache, and finally the marriage of the sweet young lady to a brewer who was mortgaged so deeply that he wandered off somewhere and never returned. years afterwards the brewery needed repairs, and one of the large vats was found to contain all of the missing man that would not assimilate with the beer, viz., his watch. quite a number of people at that time quit the use of beer, and the author gave his hand in marriage to a wealthy young lady who was attracted by his gallantry and fresh young beauty.
roger williams now settled at providence plantation, where he was joined by mrs. hutchinson, who also believed that the church and state should not be united, but that the state should protect the church and that neither should undertake to boss the other. it was also held that religious qualifications should not be required of political aspirants, also that no man should be required to whittle his soul into a shape to fit the religious auger-hole of another.
this was the beginning of rhode island. she desired at once to join the new england colony, but was refused, as she had no charter. plymouth claimed also to have jurisdiction over rhode island. this was very much like plymouth.
having banished roger williams and mrs. hutchinson to be skinned by the pequods and narragansetts over at narragansett pier, they went on about their business, flogging quakers, also ducking old women who had lumbago, and burning other women who would not answer affirmatively when asked, "be you a witch?"
then when roger began to make improvements and draw the attention of eastern capital to rhode island and to organize a state or colony with a charter, plymouth said, "hold on, roger: religiously we have cast you out, to live on wild strawberries, clams, and indians, but from a mercantile and political point of view you will please notice that we have a string which you will notice is attached to your wages and discoveries."
afterwards, however, roger williams obtained the necessary funds from admiring friends with which to go to england and obtain a charter which united the colonies yet gave to all the first official right to liberty of conscience ever granted in europe or america. prior to that a man's conscience had a brass collar on it with the royal arms engraved thereon, and was kept picketed out in the king's grounds. the owner could go and look at it on sundays, but he never had the use of it.
with the advent of freedom of political opinion, the individual use of the conscience has become popularized, and the time is coming when it will grow to a great size under our wise institutions and fostering skies. instead of turning over our consciences to the safety deposit company of a great political party or religious organization and taking the key in our pocket, let us have individual charge of this useful little instrument and be able finally to answer for its growth or decay.
chapter vii.
the discovery of new york.
the author will now refer to the discovery of the hudson river and the town of new york via fort lee and the 125th street ferry.
new york was afterwards sold for twenty-four dollars, the whole island.
when i think of this i go into my family gallery, which i also use as a swear room, and tell those ancestors of mine what i think of them. where were they when new york was sold for twenty-four dollars? were they having their portraits painted by landseer, or their deposition taken by jeffreys, or having their little lord fauntleroy clothes made?
do not encourage them to believe that they will escape me in future years. some of them died unregenerate, and are now, i am told, in a country where they may possibly be damned; and i will attend to the others personally.
twenty-four dollars for new york! why, my croton-water tax on one house and lot with fifty feet four and one-fourth inches front is fifty-nine dollars and no questions asked. why, you can't get a voter for that now.
henry or hendrik hudson was an english navigator, of whose birth and early history nothing is known definitely, hence his name is never mentioned in many of the best homes in new york.
in 1607 he made a voyage in search of the northwest passage. in one of his voyages he discovered cape cod, and later on the hudson river.
this was one hundred and seventeen years after columbus discovered america; which shows that the discovering business was not pushed as it should have been by those who had it in charge.
hudson went up the river as far as albany, but, finding no one there whom he knew, he hastened back as far as 209th street west, and anchored.
he discovered hudson bay and hudson strait, and made other journeys by water, though aquatting was then in its infancy. afterwards his sailors became mutinous, and set hendrik and his son, with seven infirm sailors, afloat.
ah! whom have we here?
it is hendrik hudson, who discovered the hudson river.
here he has just landed at the foot of 209th street, new york, where he offered the indians liquor, but they refused.
how 209th street has changed!
the artist has been fortunate in getting the expression of the indians in the act of refusing. mr. hudson's great reputation lies in the fact that he discovered the river which bears his name; but the thinking mind will at once regard the discovery of an indian who does not drink as far more wonderful.
some historians say that this especial delegation was swept away afterward by a pestilence, whilst others commenting on the incident maintain that hudson lied.
it is the only historical question regarding america not fully settled by this book.
nothing more was heard of him till he turned up in a thinking part in "rip van winkle."
many claims regarding the discovery of various parts of the united states had been previously made. the cabots had discovered labrador, the spaniards the southern part of the united states; the norsemen had discovered minneapolis, and columbus had discovered san salvador and gone home to meet a ninety-day note due in palos for the use of the pinta, which he had hired by the hour.
but we are speaking of the discovery of new york.
about this time a solitary horseman might have been seen at west 209th street, clothed in a little brief authority, and looking out to the west as he petulantly spoke in the tammany dialect, then in the language of the blank-verse indian. he began, "another day of anxiety has passed, and yet we have not been discovered! the great spirit tells me in the thunder of the surf and the roaring cataract of the harlem that within a week we will be discovered for the first time."
as he stands there aboard of his horse, one sees that he is a chief in every respect and in life's great drama would naturally occupy the middle of the stage. it was at this moment that hudson slipped down the river from albany past fort lee, and, dropping a nickel in the slot at 125th street, weighed his anchor at that place. as soon as he had landed and discovered the city, he was approached by the chief, who said, "we gates. i am one of the committee to show you our little town. i suppose you have a power of attorney, of course, for discovering us?"
"yes," said hudson. "as columbus used to say when he discovered san salvador, 'i do it by the right vested in me by my sovereigns.' 'that oversizes my pile by a sovereign and a half,' says one of the natives; and so, if you have not heard it, there is a good thing for one of your dinner-speeches here."
"very good," said the chief, as they jogged down-town on a swift sixth avenue elevated train towards the wigwams on 14th street, and going at the rate of four miles an hour. "we do not care especially who discovers us, so long as we hold control of the city organization. how about that, hank?"
"that will be satisfactory," said mr. hudson, taking a package of imported cheese and eating it, so that they could have the car to themselves.
"we will take the departments, such as police, street-cleaning, etc., etc., etc., while you and columbus get your pictures on the currency and have your graves mussed up on anniversaries. we get the two-moment horses and the country châteaux on the bronx. sabe?"
"that is, you do not care whose portrait is on the currency," said hudson, "so you get the currency."
said the man, "that is the sense of the meeting."
thus was new york discovered via albany and fort lee, and five minutes after the two touched glasses, the brim of the schoppin and the manhattan cocktail tinkled together, and new york was inaugurated.
obtaining a gentle and philanthropical gentleman who knew too well the city by gas-light, they saw the town so thoroughly that nearly every building in the morning wore a bright red sign which read
+ +
| beware of paint. |
+ +
regarding the question as to who has the right to claim the priority of discovery of new york, i unite with one of the ablest historians now living in stating that i do not know.
here and there throughout the work of all great historians who are frank and honest, chapter after chapter of information like this will burst forth upon the eye of the surprised and delighted reader.
society at the time of the discovery of the blank-verse indian of america was crude. hudson's arrival, of course, among older citizens soon called out those who desired his acquaintance, but he noticed that club life was not what it has since become, especially indian club life.
he found a nation whose regular job was war and whose religion was the ever-present prayer that they might eat the heart of their enemy plain.
the indian high school and young ladies' seminary captured by columbus, as shown in the pictures of his arrival at home and his presentation to the royal pair one hundred and seventeen years before this, it is said, brought a royal flush to the face of king ferdie, who had been well brought up.
this can be readily understood when we remember that the indian wore at court a court plaster, a parlor-lamp-shade in stormy weather, made of lawn grass, or a surcingle of front teeth.
they were shown also in all these paintings as graceful and beautiful in figure; but in those days when the pocahontas girls went barefooted till the age of eighty-nine years, chewed tobacco, kept lent all winter and then ate a brace of middle-aged men for easter, the figure must have been affected by this irregularity of meals.
unless the pocahontas of the present day has fallen off sadly in her carriage and beauty, to be saved from death by her, as smith was, and feel that she therefore had a claim on him, must have given one nervous prostration, paresis, and insomnia.
the indian and the white race never really united or amalgamated outside of canada. the indian has always held aloof from us, and even as late as sitting bull's time that noted cavalry officer said to the author that the white people who simply came over in the mayflower could not marry into his family on that ground. he wanted to know why they had to come over in the mayflower.
"we were here," said the aged warrior, as he stole a bacon-rind which i used for lubricating my saw, and ate it thoughtfully, "we were here and helped adam 'round up' and brand his animals. we are an old family, and never did manual labor. we are just as poor and proud and indolent as those who are of noble blood. we know we are of noble blood because we have to take sarsaparilla all the time. we claim to come by direct descent from job, of whom the inspired writer says,
"old job he was a fine young lad, sing glory hallelujah.
his heart was good, but his blood was bad, sing glory hallelujah."[3]
[footnote 3: this is a stanza from the works of dempster winterbottom woodworth, m.d., of ellsworth, pierce county, wisconsin, author of the "diary of judge pierce," and "life and times of melancthon klingensmith." the thanks of the author are also due to baldy sowers for a loaned copy of "how to keep up a pleasing correspondence without conveying information," 8vo, bevelled boards, published by public printer.]
chapter viii.
the dutch at new amsterdam.
soon after the discovery of the hudson, dutch ships began to visit that region, to traffic in furs with the indians. some huts were erected by these traders on manhattan island in 1613, and a trading-post was established in 1615. relics of these times are frequently turned up yet on broadway while putting in new pipes, or taking out old pipes, or repairing other pipes, or laying plans for yet other pipes, or looking in the earth to see that the original pipes have not been taken away.
afterwards the west india company obtained a grant of new netherland, and new amsterdam was fairly started. in 1626, minuit, the first governor, arrived, and, as we have stated, purchased the entire city of new york of the indians for twenty-four dollars.
then trouble sprang up between the dutch and the swedes on the delaware over the possession of manhattan, and when the two tribes got to conversing with each other over their rights, using the mother-tongue on both sides, it reminded one of the chicago wheat market when business is good. the english on the connecticut also saw that manhattan was going to boom as soon as the indians could be got farther west, and that property would be high there.
peter stuyvesant was the last dutch governor of new york. he was a relative of mine. he disliked the english very much. they annoyed him with their democratic ideas and made his life a perfect hell to him. he would be sorry to see the way our folks have since begun to imitate the english. i can almost see him rising in his grave to note how the stuyvesants in full cry pursue the affrighted anise-seed bag, or with their coaching outfits go tooling along 'cross country, stopping at the inns on the way and unlimbering their portable bath-tubs to check them with the "clark."
pete, you did well to die early. you would not have been happy here now.
while governor stuyvesant was in hot water with the english, the swedes, and the indians, a fleet anchored in the harbor and demanded the surrender of the place in the name of the duke of york, who wished to use it for a game preserve. after a hot fight with his council, some of whom were willing even then to submit to english rule and hoped that the fleet might have two or three suits of tweed which by mistake were a fit and therefore useless to the owners, and that they might succeed in swapping furs for these, the governor yielded, and in 1664 new york became a british possession, named as above.
the english governors, however, were not popular. they were mostly political hacks who were pests at home and banished to new york, where the noise of the streets soon drove them to drink. for nine years this sort of thing went on, until one day a dutch fleet anchored near the staten island brewery and in the evening took the town.
however, in the year following, peace was restored between england and holland, and new amsterdam became new york again, also subject to the tammany rule.
andros was governor for a time, but was a sort of pompous tomtit, with a short breath and a large aquiline opinion of himself. he was one of the arrogant old pie-plants whose growth was fostered by the beetle-bellied administration at home. he went back on board the city of rome one day, and did not return.
new york had a gleam of hope for civil freedom under the rule of the duke of york and the county democracy, but when the duke became james ii. he was just like other people who get a raise of salary, and refused to be privately entertained by the self-made ancestry of the american.
he was proud and arrogant to a degree. he forbade legislation, and stopped his paper. new york was at this time annexed to the new england colony, and began keeping the sabbath so vigorously that the angels had great difficulty in getting at it.
nicholson, who was the lieutenant tool of iniquity for andros, fled with him when democracy got too hot for them. captain leisler, supported by steve brodie and everything south of the harlem, but bitterly opposed by the aristocracy, who were distinguished by their ability to use new goods in making their children's clothes, whereas the democracy had to make vests for the boys from the cast-off trousers of their fathers, governed the province until governor sloughter arrived.
sloughter was another imported smearkase in official life, and arrested leisler at the request of an aristocrat who drove a pair of bang-tail horses up and down nassau street on pleasant afternoons and was afterwards collector of the port. having arrested leisler for treason, the governor was a little timid about executing him, for he had never really killed a man in his life, and he hated the sight of blood; so leisler's enemies got the governor to take dinner with them, and mixed his rum, so that when he got ready to speak, his remarks were somewhat heterogeneous, and before he went home he had signed a warrant for leisler's immediate execution.
when he awoke in the morning at his beautiful home on whitehall street, the sun was gayly glinting the choppy waves of buttermilk channel, and by his watch, which had run down, he saw that it was one o'clock, but whether it was one o'clock a.m. or p.m. he did not know, nor whether it was next saturday or tuesday before last. oh, how he must have felt!
his room was dark, the gas having gone out to get better air. he attempted to rise, but a chill, a throb, a groan, and back he lay hastily on the bed just as it was on the point of escaping him. suddenly a thought came to him. it was not a great thought, but it was such a thought as comes to those who have been thoughtless. he called for a blackamoor slave from abroad who did chores for him, and ordered a bottle of cooking brandy, then some club soda he had brought from london with him. next he drank a celery-glass of it, and after that he felt better. he then drank another.
"keep out of the way of this bed, julius," he said. "it is coming around that way again. step to one side, julius, please, and let the bed walk around and stretch its legs. i never saw a bed spread itself so," he continued, seeming to enjoy his own lancashire humor. "all night i seemed to feel a great pain creeping over me, julius," he said, hesitatingly, again filling his celery-glass, "but i see now that it was a counterpane."
eighty years after that, sloughter was a corpse.
we should learn from this not to be too hasty in selecting our birthplaces. had he been born in america, he might have been alive yet.
from this on the struggles of the people up to the time of the revolution were enough to mortify the reader almost to death. i will not go over them again. it was the history of all the other colonies; poor, proud, with large masses of children clustering about, and indians lurking in the out-buildings. the mother-country was negligent, and even cruel. her political offscourings were sent to rule the people. the cranberry-crops soured on the vines, and times were very scarce.
it was during this period that captain william kidd, a new york ship-master and anti-snapper from mulberry street, was sent out to overtake and punish a few of the innumerable pirates who then infested the high seas.
studying first the character, life, and public services of the immoral pirate, and being perfectly foot-loose, his wife having eloped with her family physician, he determined to take a little whirl at the business himself, hoping thereby to escape the noise and heat of new york and obtain a livelihood while life lasted which would maintain him the remainder of his days unless death overtook him.
dropping off at boston one day to secure a supply of tobacco, he was captured while watching the vast number of street-cars on washington street. he was taken to england, where he was tried and ultimately hanged. his sudden and sickening death did much to discourage an american youth of great brilliancy who had up to 1868 intended to be a pirate, but who, stumbling across the "life and times of captain kidd, and his awful death," changed his whole course and became one of the ablest historians of the age in which he lived.
this should teach us to read the papers instead of loaning them to people who do not subscribe.
since the above was written, the account of the death of governor andros is flashed across the wires to us. verbum sap. also in hoc signo vinces.
the author wishes to express by this means his grateful acknowledgments to his friends and the public generally for the great turn-out and general sympathy bestowed upon his relative, the late peter b. stuyvesant, on the sad occasion of his funeral, which was said to be one of the best attended and most successful funerals before the war. should any of his friends be caught in the same fix, the author will not only cheerfully turn out himself, but send all hands from his place that can be spared, also a six-seated wagon and a side-bar buggy.
chapter ix.
settlement of the middle states.
the present state of new jersey was a part of new netherland, and the dutch had a trading-post at bergen as early as 1618. after new netherland passed into the hands of the dutch, the duke of york gave the land lying between the hudson and the delaware to lord berkeley and sir george carteret for christmas.
the first permanent english settlement made in the state was at elizabethtown, named so in honor of sir george's first wife.
berkeley sold his part to some english quakers. this part was called west jersey. he claimed that it was too far from town. it was very hard for a lord to clear up land, and berkeley missed his evenings at the savage club, and his nose yearned for a good whiff of real old rotten row fog.
so many disputes arose regarding the title to jersey that the whole thing finally reverted to the crown in 1702. when there was any trouble over titles in those days it was always settled by letting it revert to the crown. it has been some years now, however, since that has happened in this country.
thirty-six years later new jersey was set apart as a separate royal province, and became a railroad terminus and bathing-place.
delaware was settled by the swedes at wilmington first, and called new sweden. i am surprised that the norsemen, who it is claimed made the first and least expensive summer at newport, r. i., should not have clung to it.
they could have made a good investment, and in a few years would have been strong enough to wipe out the brooklyn police.
the swedes, too, had a good foothold in new york, jersey, and delaware, also a start in pennsylvania. but the two nations seemed to yearn for home, and as soon as boats began to run regularly to stockholm and christiania, they returned. in later years they discovered minneapolis and stillwater.
william penn now loomed up on the horizon. he was an english quaker who had been expelled from oxford and jugged in cork also for his religious belief. he was the son of admiral sir william penn, and had a good record. he believed that elocutionary prayer was unnecessary, and that the acoustics of heaven were such that the vilest sinner with no voice-culture could be heard in the remotest portion of the gallery.
the only thing that has been said against penn with any sort of semblance of truth was that he had some influence with james ii. the duke of york also stood in with penn, and used to go about in england bailing william out whenever he was jailed on account of his religious belief.
penn was quite a writer (see appendix). he was the author of "no cross, no crown," "innocency with her open face," and "the great cause of liberty of conscience."
from his father he had inherited a claim against the government for sixteen thousand pounds, probably arrears of pension. he finally received the state of pennsylvania as payment of the claim. the western boundary took in the cliff house and seal rocks of san francisco.
penn came to america in 1682 and bought his land over again from the indians. it is not strange that he got the best terms he could out of the indians, but still it is claimed that they were satisfied, therefore he did not cheat them.
the indian, as will be noticed by reading these pages thoughtfully, was never a napoleon of finance. he is that way down to the present day. if you watch him carefully and notice his ways, you can dicker with him to better advantage than you can with russell sage.
take the indian just before breakfast after two or three nights of debauchery, and offer him a jug of absinthe with a horned toad in it for his pony and saddle, and you will get them. even in his more sober and thoughtful moments you can swap a suit of red medicated flannels with him for a farm.
penn gathered about him many different kinds of people, with various sorts and shades of belief. some were free-will and some were hard-shell, some were high-church and reminded one of a masonic lodge working at 32°, while others were low-church and omitted crossing themselves frequently while putting down a new carpet in the chancel.
but he was too well known at court, and suspected of knowledge of and participation in some of the questionable acts of king james, so that after the latter's dethronement, and an intimation that penn had communicated with the exiled monarch, penn was deprived of his title to pennsylvania, for which he had twice paid.
penn was a constant sufferer at the hands of his associates, who sought to injure him in every way. he rounded out a life of suffering by marrying the second time in 1695.
in 1708 he was on the verge of bankruptcy, owing to the villany and mismanagement of his agent, and was thrown into fleet street prison, a jail in which he had never before been confined. his health gave way afterwards, and this remarkable man died july 30, 1718.
philadelphia was founded in 1683 and work begun on a beautiful building known as the city hall. work has steadily progressed on this building from time to time since then, and at this writing it is so near completion as to give promise of being one of the most perfect architectural jobs ever done by the hand of man.
in two years philadelphia had sprung from a wilderness, where the rank thistle nodded in the wind, to a town of over two thousand people, exclusive of indians not taxed. in three years it had gained more than new york had in fifty years. this was due to the fact that the people who came to philadelphia had nothing to fear but the indians, while settlers in new york had not only the indians to defend themselves against, but the police also.
penn and his followers established the great law that no one who believed in almighty god should be molested in his religious belief.
even the indians liked penn, and when the nights were cold they would come and crawl into his bed and sleep with him all night and not kill him at all. the great chief of the tribes, even, did not feel above this, and the two used frequently to lie and talk for hours, penn doing the talking and the chief doing the lying.
it is said that, with all the indian massacres and long wars between the red men and the white, no drop of quaker blood was ever shed. i quote this from an historian who is much older than i, and with whom i do not wish to have any controversy.
after penn's death his heirs ran the colony up to 1779, when they disposed of it for five hundred thousand dollars or thereabouts, and the state became the proprietor.
the seventeenth century must have been a very disagreeable period for people who professed religion, for america from newfoundland to florida was dotted with little settlements almost entirely made up of people who had escaped from england to secure religious freedom at the risk of their lives.
in 1634 the first settlement was made by young lord baltimore, whose people, the catholics, were fleeing from england to obtain freedom to worship god as they believed to be right. thus the catholics were added to the list of religious refugees, viz., the huguenots, the puritans, the walloons, the quakers, the presbyterians, the whigs, and the menthol healers.
terra mariæ, or maryland, was granted to lord baltimore, as the successor of his father, who had begun before his death the movement for settling his people in america. the charter gave to all freemen a voice in making the laws. among the first laws passed was one giving to every human being upon payment of poll-tax the right to worship freely according to the dictates of his own conscience. america thus became the refuge for those who had any peculiarity of religious belief, until to-day no doubt more varieties of religion may be found here than almost anywhere else in the world.
in 1635 the virginia colony and lord baltimore had some words over the boundaries between the jamestown and maryland colonies. clayborne was the jamestown man who made the most trouble. he had started a couple of town sites on the maryland tract, plotted them, and sold lots to yorkshire tenderfeet, and so when lord baltimore claimed the lands clayborne attacked him, and there was a running skirmish for several years, till at last the rebellion collapsed in 1645 and clayborne fled.
the protestants now held the best hand, and outvoted the catholics, so up to 1691 there was a never-dying fight between the two, which must have been entertaining to the unregenerate outsider who was taxed to pay for a double set of legislators. this fight between the catholics and protestants shows that intolerance is not confined to a monarchy.
in 1715 the fourth lord baltimore recovered the government by the aid of the police, and religious toleration was restored. maryland remained under this system of government until the revolution, which will be referred to later on in the most thrilling set of original pictures and word-paintings that the reader has ever met with.
chapter x.
the early aristocracy.
lord clarendon and several other noblemen in 1663 obtained from charles ii. a grant of lands lying south of virginia which they called carolina in honor of the king, whose name was not really carolina. possibly that was his middle name, however, or his name in latin.
the albemarle colony was first on the ground. then there was a carteret colony in 1670. they "removed the ancient groves covered with yellow jessamine" on the ashley, and began to build on the present site of charleston.
the historian remarks that the growth of this colony was rapid from the first. the dutch, dissatisfied with the way matters were conducted in new york, and worn out when shopping by the ennui and impudence of the salesladies, came to charleston in large numbers, and the huguenots in charleston found a hearty southern welcome, and did their trading there altogether.
we now pass on to speak of the grand model which was set up as a five-cent aristocracy by lord shaftesbury and the great philosopher john locke. the canebrakes and swamps of the wild and snake-infested jungles of the wilderness were to be divided into vast estates, over which were proprietors with hereditary titles and outing flannels.
this scheme recognized no rights of self-government whatever, and denied the very freedom which the people came there in search of. so there were murmurings among those people who had not brought their finger-bowls and equerries with them.
in short, aristocracy did not do well on this soil. baronial castles, with hot and cold water in them, were often neglected, because the colonists would not forsake their own lands to the thistle and blue-nosed brier in order to come and cook victuals for the baronial castles or sweep out the baronial halls and wax the baronial floors for a journeyman juke who ate custard pie with a knife and drank tea from his saucer through a king charles moustache.
thus the aristocracy was forced to close its doors, and the arms of lord shaftesbury were so humiliated that he could no longer put up his dukes (see appendix).
there had also been a great deal of friction between the albemarle or carteret and the charleston set, the former being from virginia, while the latter was, as we have seen, a little given to kindergarten aristocracy and ofttimes tripped up on their parade swords while at the plough. of course outside of this were the plebeian people, or copperas-culottes, who did the work; but lord shaftesbury for some time, as we have seen, lived in a baronial shed and had his arms worked on the left breast of his nighty.
so these two colonies finally became separate states in the union, though there is yet something of the same feeling between the people.
wealthy people come to the mountains of north carolina from south carolina for the cool summer breezes of the old north state, and have to pay two dollars per breeze even up to the past summer.
thus there was constant irritation and disgust up to 1729 at least, regarding taxes, rents, and rights, until, as the historian says, "the discouraged proprietors ceded their rights to the crown."
it will be noticed that the crown was well ceded by this time, and the poet's remark seems at this time far grander and more apropos than any language of the writer could be: so it is given here, viz., "uneasy lies the head that wears a seedy crown." (see appendix.)
the year of washington's birth, viz., 1732, witnessed the birth of the baby colony of georgia. james oglethorpe, a kind-hearted man, with a wig that fooled more than one poor child of the forest, conceived the idea of founding a refuge for englishmen who could not pay up. the laws were very arbitrary then, and harsh to a degree. many were imprisoned then in england for debt, but those who visit london now will notice that they are at liberty.
oglethorpe was an officer and a gentleman, and this scheme showed his generous nature and philanthropic disposition. george ii. granted him in trust for the poor a tract of land called, in honor of the king, georgie, which has recently been changed to georgia. the enterprise prospered remarkably, and generous and charitable people aided it in every possible way. people who had not been able for years to pay their debts came to georgia and bought large tracts of land or began merchandising with the indians. thousands of acres of rich cotton-lands were exchanged by the indians for orders on the store, they giving warranty deeds to same, reserving only the rights of piscary and massacre.
oglethorpe got along with the indians first-rate, and won their friendship. one great chief, having received a present from oglethorpe consisting of a manicure set, on the following christmas gave oglethorpe a beautiful buffalo robe, on the inside of which were painted an eagle and a portable bath-tub, signifying, as the chief stated, that the buffalo was the emblem of strength, the eagle of swiftness, and the bath-tub the advertisement of cleanliness. "thus," said the chief, "the english are strong as the buffalo, swift as the eagle, and love to convey the idea that they are just about to take a bath when you came and interrupted them."
the moravians also came to georgia, and the scotch highlanders. on the arrival of the latter, the georgia mosquitoes held a mass meeting, at which speeches were made, and songs sung, and resolutions adopted making the highland uniform the approved costume for the entire coast during summer.
george whitefield the eloquent, who often addressed audiences (even in those days, when advertising was still in its infancy and the advance agent was unheard of) of from five thousand to forty thousand people, founded an orphan asylum. one audience consisted of sixty thousand people. the money from this work all went to help and sustain the orphan asylum. while reading of him we are reminded of our own dr. talmage, who is said to be the wealthiest apostle on the road.
the trustees of georgia limited the size of a man's farm, did not allow women to inherit land, and forbade the importation of rum or of slaves.
several of these rules were afterwards altered, so that as late as 1893 at least a gentleman from washington, d.c., well known for his truth and honesty, saw rum inside the state twice, though bourbon whiskey was preferred. slaves also were found inside the state, and the negro is seen there even now; but the popularity of a negro baby is nothing now to what it was at the time when this class of goods went up to the top notch.
need i add that after a while the people became dissatisfied with these rules and finally the whole matter was ceded to the crown? from this time on georgia remained a royal province up to the revolution. since that very little has been said about ceding it to the crown.
north carolina also remained an english colony up to the same period, and, though one of the original thirteen colonies, is still far more sparsely settled than some of the western states.
virginia dare was the first white child born in america. she selected roanoke, now in north carolina, in august, 1587, as her birthplace. she was a grand-daughter of the governor, john white. her fate, like that of the rest of the colony, is unknown to this day.
the author begs leave to express his thanks here for the valuable aid furnished him by the following works, viz.: "the horse and his diseases," by mr. astor; "life and times of john oglethorpe," by elias g. merritt; "how to make the garden pay," by peter henderson; "over the purple hills," by mrs. churchill, of denver, colorado, and "he played on the harp of a thousand strings, and the spirits of just men made perfect," by s. p. avery.
chapter xi.
intercolonial and indian wars.
intercolonial and indian wars furnished excitement now from 1689 into the early part of the eighteenth century. war broke out in europe between the french and english, and the colonies had to take sides, as did also the indians.
canadians and indians would come down into york state or new england, burn a town, tomahawk quite a number of people, then go back on snow-shoes, having entered the town on rubbers, like a decayed show with no printing.
there was an attack on haverhill in march, 1697, and a mr. dustin was at work in the field. he ran to his house and got his seven children ahead of him, while with his gun he protected their rear till he got them away safely. mrs. dustin, however, who ran back into the house to remove a pie from the oven as she feared it was burning, was captured, and, with a boy of the neighborhood, taken to an island in the merrimac, where the indians camped. at night she woke the boy, told him how to hit an indian with a tomahawk so that "the subsequent proceedings would interest him no more," and that evening the two stole forth while the ten indians slept, knocked in their thinks, scalped them to prove their story, and passed on to safety. mrs. dustin kept those scalps for many years, showing them to her friends to amuse them.
king william's war lasted eight years. queen anne's war lasted from 1702 to 1713. the brunt of this war fell on new england. our forefathers had to live in block-houses, with barbed-wire fences around them, and carry their guns with them all the time. from planting the indian with a shotgun, they soon got to planting their corn with the same agricultural instrument in the stony soil.
the french and spanish tried to take charleston in 1706, but were repulsed with great loss, consisting principally of time which they might have employed in raising frogs' legs and tantalizing a bull at so much per tant.
this war lasted eleven years, including stops, and was ended by the treaty of utrecht (pronounced you-trecked).
after this, what was called the spanish war continued between england and spain for some time. an attempt to capture georgia was made, and a garrison established itself there, with good prospects of taking in the state under spanish rule, but our able friend oglethorpe, the henry w.
grady of his time, managed to accidentally mislay a letter which fell into the enemy's hands, the contents of which showed that enormous reinforcements were expected at any moment. this was swallowed comfortably by the commander, who blew up his impregnable works, changed the address of his atlanta constitution, and sailed for home.
oglethorpe wore a wig, but was otherwise one of our greatest minds. it is said that anybody at a distance of two miles on a clear day could readily distinguish that it was a wig, and yet he died believing that no one had ever probed his great mystery and that his wig would rise with him at the playing of the last trump.
king george's war, which extended over four years, succeeded, but did not amount to anything except the capture of cape breton by english and colonial troops. cape breton was called the gibraltar of america; but a yankee farmer who has raised flax on an upright farm for twenty years does not mind scaling a couple of gibraltars before breakfast; so, without any west point knowledge regarding engineering, they walked up the hill, and those who were alive when they got to the top took it. it was no balaklava business and no dumb animal show, but simply revealed the fact that brave men fighting for their eight-dollar homes and a mass of children are disagreeable people to meet on the battle-field.
the french and indian war lasted nine years, viz., from 1754 to 1763.
from quebec to new orleans the french owned the land, and mixed up a good deal socially with the indians, so that the slender settlement along the coast had arrayed against it this vast line of northern and western forts, and the indians, who were mostly friendly with the french, united with them in several instances and showed them some new styles of barbarism which up to that time they had never known about.
the half-breed is always half french and half indian.
the english owned all lands lying on one side of the ohio, the french on the other, which led a great chief to make a p. p. c. call on governor dinwiddie, and during the conversation to inquire with some naïveté where the indian came in. no answer was ever received.
we pause here to ask the question, why did the pale-face usurp the lands of the indians without remuneration? it was because the indian was not orthodox. he may have been lazy from a puritanical stand-point, and he may also have hunted on the twenty-seventh sunday after easter; but still was it not right that he should have received a dollar or two per county for the united states? no one would have felt it, and possibly it might have saved the lives of innocent people.
verbum sap., however, comes in here with peculiar appropriateness, and the massive-browed historian passes on.
the french had three forts along in the middle states, as they are now called, and western pennsylvania; and george washington, of whom more will be said in the twelfth chapter, was sent to ask the french to remove these forts. he started at once.
the commanders were some of them arrogant, but the general, st. pierre, treated him with great respect, refusing, however, to yield the ground discovered by la salle and marquette. the author had the pleasure of being arrested in paris in 1889, and he feels of a truth, as he often does, that there can be no more polite people in the world than the french. arrested under all circumstances and in many lands, the author can place his hand on his heart and say that he would go hundreds of miles to be arrested by a john darm.
washington returned four hundred miles through every kind of danger, including a lunch at altoona, where he stopped twenty minutes.
the following spring washington was sent under general fry to drive out the french, who had started farming at pittsburg. fry died, and washington took command. he liked it very much. after that washington took command whenever he could, and soon rose to be a great man.
the first expedition against fort duquesne (pronounced du-kane) was commanded by general braddock, whose portrait we are able to give, showing him at the time he did not take washington's advice in the duquesne matter. later we show him as he appeared after he had abandoned his original plans and immediately after not taking washington's advice.
"the indians," said braddock, "may frighten colonial troops, but they can make no impression on the king's regulars. we are alike impervious to fun or fear."
braddock thought of fighting the indians by man[oe]uvring in large bodies, but the first body to be man[oe]uvred was that of general braddock, who perished in about a minute.
we give the reader, above, an idea of braddock's soldierly bearing after he had been man[oe]uvring a few times.
it was then that washington took command, as was his custom, and began to fight the indians and french as one would hunt varmints in virginia.
braddock's men fired by platoons into the trees and tore a few holes in the state line, but when most of the colonial troops were dead the regulars presented their tournures to the foe and fled as far as philadelphia, where they each took a bath and had some laundry-work done.
general forbes took command of the second expedition. he spent most of his time building roads.
time passed on, and forbes built viaducts, conduits, culverts, and rustic bridges, till it was november, and they were yet fifty miles from the fort. he then decided to abandon the expedition, on account of the cold, and also fearing that he had not made all of his bridges wide enough so that he could take the captured fort home with him.
washington, however, though only an aidy kong of general forbes, decided to take command. his mother had said to him over and over, "george, in an emergency always take command." he done so, as general rusk would say. as he approached, the french set fire to the fort, and retreated, together with the indians and molly maguires.
pittsburg now stands on this historic ground, and is one of the most delightful cities of america.
many other changes were going on at this time. the english got possession of acadia and the french forts at the head of the bay of fundy.
in 1757 general loudon collected an army for an attack on louisburg. he drilled his troops all summer, and then gave up the attack because he learned that the french had one more skiff than he had.
the loudons of america at the time of this writing are more quiet and sensible regarding their ancestry than any of the doodle-bug aristocracy of our promoted peasantry and the crested yahoos of our cowboy republic.
the loudons or lowdowns of america had a very large family. some of them changed their names and moved.
the next year after the fox pass of general loudon, amherst and wolfe took possession of the entire island.
about the time of braddock's justly celebrated expedition another started out for crown point. the french, under dieskau (pronounced dees-kow), met the army composed of colonial troops in plain clothes, together with the regular troops led by officers with drawn swords and overdrawn salaries. the regular general, seeing that the battle was lost, excused himself and retired to his tent, owing to an ingrowing nail which had annoyed him all day. lyman, the colonial officer now took command, and wrung victory from the reluctant jaws of defeat. for this johnson, the english general, received twenty-five thousand dollars and a baronetcy, while lyman received a plated butter-dish and a bass-wood what-not. but lyman was a married man, and had learned to take things as they came.
four months prior to the capture of duquesne, one thousand boats loaded with soldiers, each with a neat little lunch-basket and a little flag to wave when they hurrahed for the good kind man at the head of the picnic, viz., general abercrombie, sailed down lake george to get a whiff of fresh air and take ticonderoga.
when they arrived, general abercrombie took out a small book regarding tactics which he had bought on the boat, and, after refreshing his memory, ordered an assault. he then went back to see how his rear was, and, finding it all right, he went back still farther, to see if no one had been left behind.
abercrombie never forgot or overlooked any one. he wanted all of his pleasure-party to be where they could see the fight.
in that way he missed it himself. i would hate to miss a fight that way.
the abercrombies of america mostly trace their ancestry back by a cut-off avoiding the general's line.
niagara had an expedition sent against it at the time of braddock's trip. the commander was general shirley, but he ran out of money while at the falls and decided to return. this post did not finally surrender till 1759.
this gave the then west to the english. they had tried for one hundred and forty years to civilize it, but, alas, with only moderate success.
prosperous and happy even while sniping in their fox-hunting or canvas-back-duck clothes, these people feel somewhat soothed for their lack of culture because they are well-to-do.
in 1759 general wolfe anchored off quebec with his fleet and sent a boy up town to ask if there were any letters for him at the post-office, also asking at what time it would be convenient to evacuate the place.
the reply came back from general montcalm, an able french general, that there was no mail for the general, but if wolfe was dissatisfied with the report he might run up personally and look over the w's.
wolfe did so, taking his troops up by an unknown cow-path on the off side of the mountain during the night, and at daylight stood in battle-array on the plains of abraham. an attack was made by montcalm as soon as he got over his wonder and surprise. at the third fire wolfe was fatally wounded, and as he was carried back to the rear he heard some one exclaim,
"they run! they run!"
"who run?" inquired wolfe.
"the french! the french!" came the reply.
"now god be praised," said wolfe, "i die happy."
montcalm had a similar experience. he was fatally wounded. "they run!
they run!" he heard some one say.
"who run?" exclaimed montcalm, wetting his lips with a lemonade-glass of cognac.
"we do," replied the man.
"then so much the better," said montcalm, as his eye lighted up, "for i shall not live to see quebec surrendered."
this shows what can be done without a rehearsal; also how the historian has to control himself in order to avoid lying.
the death of these two brave men is a beautiful and dramatic incident in the history of our country, and should be remembered by every school-boy, because neither lived to write articles criticising the other.
five days later the city capitulated. an attempt was made to recapture it, but it was not successful. canada fell into the hands of the english, and from the open polar sea to the mississippi the english flag floated.
what an empire!
what a game-preserve!
florida was now ceded to the already cedy crown of england by spain, and brandy-and-soda for the wealthy and bitter beer became the drink of the poor.
pontiac's war was brought on by the indians, who preferred the french occupation to that of the english. pontiac organized a large number of tribes on the spoils plan, and captured eight forts. he killed a great many people, burned their dwellings, and drove out many more, but at last his tribes made trouble, as there were not spoils enough to go around, and his army was conquered. he was killed in 1769 by an indian who received for his trouble a barrel of liquor, with which he began to make merry. he remained by the liquor till death came to his relief.
the heroism of an indian who meets his enemy single-handed in that way, and, though greatly outnumbered, dies with his face to the foe, is deserving of more than a passing notice.
the french and indian war cost the colonists sixteen million dollars, of which the english repaid only five million. the americans lost thirty thousand men, none of whom were replaced. they suffered every kind of horror and barbarity, written and unwritten, and for years their taxes were two-thirds of their income; and yet they did not murmur.
these were the fathers and mothers of whom we justly brag. these were the people whose children we are. what are inherited titles and ancient names many times since dishonored, compared with the heritage of uncomplaining suffering and heroism which we boast of to-day because those modest martyrs were working people, proud that by the sweat of their brows they wrung from a niggardly soil the food they ate, proud also that they could leave the plough to govern or to legislate, able also to survey a county or rule a nation.
chapter xii.
personality of washington.
it would seem that a few personal remarks about george washington at this point might not be out of place. later on his part in this history will more fully appear.
the author points with some pride to a study of washington's great act in crossing the delaware, from a wax-work of great accuracy. the reader will avoid confusing washington with the author, who is dressed in a plaid suit and on the shore, while washington may be seen in this end of the boat with the air of one who has just discovered the location of a glue-factory on the side of the river.
a directory of washington's head-quarters has been arranged by the author of this book, and at a reunion of the general's body-servants to be held in the future the work will be on sale.
the name of george washington has always had about it a glamour that made him appear more in the light of a god than a tall man with large feet and a mouth made to fit an old-fashioned full-dress pumpkin pie.
george washington's face has beamed out upon us for many years now, on postage-stamps and currency, in marble and plaster and in bronze, in photographs of original portraits, paintings, and stereoscopic views. we have seen him on horseback and on foot, on the war-path and on skates, playing the flute, cussing his troops for their shiftlessness, and then, in the solitude of the forest, with his snorting war-horse tied to a tree, engaged in prayer.
we have seen all these pictures of george, till we are led to believe that he did not breathe our air or eat american groceries. but george washington was not perfect. i say this after a long and careful study of his life, and i do not say it to detract the very smallest iota from the proud history of the father of his country. i say it simply that the boys of america who want to become george washingtons will not feel so timid about trying it.
when i say that george washington, who now lies so calmly in the lime-kiln at mount vernon, could reprimand and reproach his subordinates, at times, in a way to make the ground crack open and break up the ice in the delaware a week earlier than usual, i do not mention it in order to show the boys of our day that profanity will make them resemble george washington. that was one of his weak points, and no doubt he was ashamed of it, as he ought to have been. some poets think that if they get drunk and stay drunk they will resemble edgar a. poe and george d. prentice. there are lawyers who play poker year after year and get regularly skinned because they have heard that some of the able lawyers of the past century used to come home at night with poker-chips in their pockets.
whiskey will not make a poet, nor poker a great pleader. and yet i have seen poets who relied on the potency of their breath, and lawyers who knew more of the habits of a bobtail flush than they ever did of the statutes in such case made and provided.
george washington was always ready. if you wanted a man to be first in war, you could call on george. if you desired an adult who would be first baseman in time of peace, mr. washington could be telephoned at any hour of the day or night. if you needed a man to be first in the hearts of his countrymen, george's post-office address was at once secured.
though he was a great man, he was once a poor boy. how often you hear that in america! here it is a positive disadvantage to be born wealthy.
and yet sometimes i wish they had experimented a little that way on me.
i do not ask now to be born rich, of course, because it is too late; but it seems to me that, with my natural good sense and keen insight into human nature, i could have struggled along under the burdens and cares of wealth with great success. i do not care to die wealthy, but if i could have been born wealthy it seems to me i would have been tickled almost to death.
i love to believe that true greatness is not accidental. to think and to say that greatness is a lottery, is pernicious. man may be wrong sometimes in his judgment of others, both individually and in the aggregate, but he who gets ready to be a great man will surely find the opportunity.
you will wonder whom i got to write this sentiment for me, but you will never find out.
in conclusion, let me say that george washington was successful for three reasons. one was that he never shook the confidence of his friends. another was that he had a strong will without being a mule.
some people cannot distinguish between being firm and being a big blue donkey.
another reason why washington is loved and honored to-day is that he died before we had a chance to get tired of him. this is greatly superior to the method adopted by many modern statesmen, who wait till their constituency weary of them, and then reluctantly pass away.
chapter xiii.
contrasts with the present day.
here it may be well to speak briefly of the contrast between the usages and customs of the period preceding the revolution, and the present day.
some of these customs and regulations have improved with the lapse of time, others undoubtedly have not.
two millions of people constituted the entire number of whites, while away to the westward the red brother extended indefinitely. religiously they were protestants, and essentially they were "a god-fearing people."
taught to obey a power they were afraid of, they naturally turned with delight to the service of a god whose genius in the erection of a boundless and successful hell challenged their admiration and esteem.
so, too, their own executions of divine laws were successful as they gave pain, and the most beautiful features of christianity, namely, love and charity, according to history, were not cultivated very much.
there were in new england at one time twelve offences punishable with death, and in virginia seventeen. this would indicate that the death-penalty is getting unpopular very fast, and that in the contiguous future humane people will wonder why murder should have called for murder, in this brainy, charitable, and occult age, in which man seems almost able to pry open the future and catch a glimpse of destiny underneath the great tent that has heretofore held him off by means of death's prohibitory rates.
in hartford people had to get up when the town watchman rang his bell.
the affairs of the family, and private matters too numerous to mention, were regulated by the selectmen. the catalogues of harvard and yale were regulated according to the standing of the family as per record in the old country, and not as per bust measurement and merit, as it is to-day.
scolding women, however, were gagged and tied to their front doors, so that the populace could bite its thumb at them, and hired girls received fifty dollars a year, with the understanding that they were not to have over two days out each week, except sunday and the days they had to go and see their "sick sisters."
some cloth-weaving was indulged in, and homespun was the principal material used for clothing. mrs. washington had sixteen spinning-wheels in her house. her husband often wore homespun while at home, and on rainy days sometimes placed a pair of home-made trousers of the barn-door variety in the presidential chair.
money was very scarce, and ammunition very valuable. in 1635 musket-balls passed for farthings, and to see a new england peasant making change with the red brother at thirty yards was a common and delightful scene.
the first press was set up in cambridge in 1639, with the statement that it "had come to stay." books printed in those days were mostly sermons filled with the most comfortable assurance that the man who let loose his intellect and allowed it to disbelieve some very difficult things would be essentially well, i hate to say right here in a book what would happen to him.
the first daily paper, called the federal orrery, was issued three hundred years after columbus discovered america. it was not popular, and killed off the news-boys who tried to call it on the streets: so it perished.
there was a public library in new york, from which books were loaned at fourpence ha'penny per week. new york thus became very early the seat of learning, and soon afterwards began to abuse the site where chicago now stands.
travel was slow, the people went on horseback or afoot, and when they could go by boat it was regarded as a success. wagons finally made the trip from new york to philadelphia in the wild time of forty-eight hours, and the line was called the flying dutchman, or some other euphonious name. benjamin franklin, whose biography occurs in chapter xv., was then postmaster-general.
he was the first bald-headed man of any prominence in the history of america. he and his daughter sally took a trip in a chaise, looking over the entire system, and going to all offices. nothing pleased the postmaster-general like quietly slipping into a place like sandy bottom and catching the postmaster reading over the postal cards and committing them to memory.
calfskin shoes up to the revolution were the exclusive property of the gentry, and the rest wore cowhide and were extremely glad to mend them themselves. these were greased every week with tallow, and could be worn on either foot with impunity. rights and lefts were never thought of until after the revolutionary war, but to-day the american shoe is the most symmetrical, comfortable, and satisfactory shoe made in the world.
the british shoe is said to be more comfortable. possibly for a british foot it is so, but for a foot containing no breathing-apparatus or viscera it is somewhat roomy and clumsy.
farmers and laborers of those days wore green or red baize in the shape of jackets, and their breeches were made of leather or bed-ticking. our ancestors dressed plainly, and a man who could not make over two hundred pounds per year was prohibited from dressing up or wearing lace worth over two shillings per yard. it was a pretty sad time for literary men, as they were thus compelled to wear clothing like the common laborers.
lord cornwallis once asked his aidy kong why the american poet always had such an air of listening as if for some expected sound. "i give it up," retorted the aidy kong. "it is," said lord cornwallis, as he took a large drink from a jug which he had tied to his saddle, "because he is trying to see if he cannot hear his bed-ticking." on the following day he surrendered his army, and went home to spring his bon-mot on george iii.
yet the laws were very stringent in other respects besides apparel. a man was publicly whipped for killing a fowl on the sabbath in new england. in order to keep a tavern and sell rum, one had to be of good moral character and possess property, which was a good thing. the names of drunkards were posted up in the alehouses, and the keepers forbidden to sell them liquor. no person under twenty years of age could use tobacco in connecticut without a physician's order, and no one was allowed to use it more than once a day, and then not within ten miles of any house. it was a common thing to see large picnic-parties going out into the backwoods of connecticut to smoke.
(will the reader excuse me a moment while i light up a peculiarly black and redolent pipe?)
only the gentry were called mr. and mrs. this included the preacher and his wife. a friend of mine who is one of the gentry of this century got on the trail of his ancestry last spring, and traced them back to where they were not allowed to be called mr. and mrs., and, fearing he would fetch up in scotland yard if he kept on, he slowly unrolled the bottoms of his trousers, got a job on the railroad, and since then his friends are gradually returning to him. he is well pleased now, and looks humbly gratified even if you call him a gent.
the scriptures were literally interpreted, and the old testament was read every morning, even if the ladies fainted.
the custom yet noticed sometimes in country churches and festive gatherings of placing the males and females on opposite sides of the room was originated not so much as a punishment to both, as to give the men an opportunity to act together when the red brother felt ill at ease.
i am glad the red brother does not molest us nowadays, and make us sit apart that way. keep away, red brother; remain on your reservation, please, so that the pale-face may sit by the loved one and hold her little soft hand during the sermon.
church services meant business in those days. people brought their dinners and had a general penitential gorge. instrumental music was proscribed, as per amos fifth chapter and twenty-third verse, and the length of prayer was measured by the physical endurance of the performer.
the preacher often boiled his sermon down to four hours, and the sexton up-ended the hourglass each hour. boys who went to sleep in church were sand-bagged, and grew up to be border murderers.
new york people were essentially dutch. new york gets her santa claus, her doughnuts, crullers, cookies, and many of her odors, from the dutch.
the new york matron ran to fine linen and a polished door-knocker, while the new england housewife spun linsey-woolsey and knit "yarn mittens"
for those she loved.
philadelphia was the largest city in the united states, and was noted for its cleanliness and generally sterling qualities of mind and heart, its sabbath trance and clean white door-steps.
the southern colonies were quite different from those of the north. in place of thickly-settled towns there were large plantations with african villages near the house of the owner. the proprietor was a sort of country squire, living in considerable comfort for those days. he fed and clothed everybody, black or white, who lived on the estate, and waited patiently for the colored people to do his work and keep well, so that they would be more valuable. the colored people were blessed with children at a great rate, so that at this writing, though voteless, they send a large number of members to congress. this cheers the southern heart and partially recoups him for his chickens. (see appendix.)
the south then, as now, cured immense quantities of tobacco, while the north tried to cure those who used it.
washington was a virginian. he packed his own flour with his own hands, and it was never inspected. people who knew him said that the only man who ever tried to inspect washington's flour was buried under a hill of choice watermelons at mount vernon.
along the james and rappahannock the vast estates often passed from father to son according to the law of entail, and such a thing as a poor man "prior to the war" must have been unknown.
education, however, flourished more at the north, owing partly to the fact that the people lived more in communities. governor berkeley of virginia was opposed to free schools from the start, and said, "i thank god there are no free schools nor printing-presses here, and i hope we shall not have them these hundred years." his prayer has been answered.
chapter xiv.
the revolutionary war.
william pitt was partly to blame for the revolutionary war. he claimed that the colonists ought not to manufacture so much as a horseshoe nail except by permission of parliament.
it was already hard enough to be a colonist, without the privilege of expressing one's self even to an indian without being fined. but when we pause to think that england seemed to demand that the colonist should take the long wet walk to liverpool during a busy season of the year to get his horse shod, we say at once that p. henry was right when he exclaimed that the war was inevitable and moved that permission be granted for it to come.
then came the stamp act, making almost everything illegal that was not written on stamp paper furnished by the maternal country.
john adams, patrick henry, and john otis made speeches regarding the situation. bells were tolled, and fasting and prayer marked the first of november, the day for the law to go into effect.
these things alarmed england for the time, and the stamp act was repealed; but the king, who had been pretty free with his money and had entertained a good deal, began to look out for a chance to tax the colonists, and ordered his exchequer board to attend to it.
patrick henry got excited, and said in an early speech, "cæsar had his brutus, charles the first his cromwell, and george the third " here he paused and took a long swig of pure water, and added, looking at the newspaper reporters, "if this be treason, make the most of it." he also said that george the third might profit by their example. a good many would like to know what he started out to say, but it is too hard to determine.
boston ladies gave up tea and used the dried leaves of the raspberry, and the girls of 1777 graduated in homespun. could the iron heel of despotism crunch such a spirit of liberty as that? scarcely. in one family at newport four hundred and eighty-seven yards of cloth and thirty-six pairs of stockings were spun and made in eighteen months.
when the war broke out it is estimated that each colonial soldier had twenty-seven pairs of blue woollen socks with white double heels and toes. does the intelligent reader believe that "tommy atkins," with two pairs of socks "and hit a-rainin'," could whip men with twenty-seven pairs each? not without restoratives.
troops were now sent to restore order. they were clothed by the british government, but boarded around with the colonists. this was irritating to the people, because they had never met or called on the british troops. again, they did not know the troops were coming, and had made no provision for them.
boston was considered the hot-bed of the rebellion, and general gage was ordered to send two regiments of troops there. he did so, and a fight ensued, in which three citizens were killed.
in looking over this incident, we must not forget that in those days three citizens went a good deal farther than they do now.
the fight, however, was brief. general gage, getting into a side street, separated from his command, and, coming out on the common abruptly, he tried eight or nine more streets, but he came out each time on the common, until, torn with conflicting emotions, he hired a herdic, which took him around the corner to his quarters.
on december 16, 1773, occurred the tea-party at boston, which must have been a good deal livelier than those of to-day. the historian regrets that he was not there; he would have tried to be the life of the party.
england had finally so arranged the price of tea that, including the tax, it was cheaper in america than in the old country. this exasperated the patriots, who claimed that they were confronted by a theory and not a condition. at charleston this tea was stored in damp cellars, where it spoiled. new york and philadelphia returned their ships, but the british would not allow any shenanegin', as george iii. so tersely termed it, in boston.
therefore a large party met in faneuil hall and decided that the tea should not be landed. a party made up as indians, and, going on board, threw the tea overboard. boston harbor, as far out as the bug light, even to-day, is said to be carpeted with tea-grounds.
george iii. now closed boston harbor and made general gage governor of massachusetts. the virginia assembly murmured at this, and was dissolved and sent home without its mileage.
those opposed to royalty were termed whigs, those in favor were called tories. now they are called chappies or authors.
on the 5th of september, 1774, the first continental congress assembled at philadelphia and was entertained by the clover club. congress acted slowly even then, and after considerable delay resolved that the conduct of great britain was, under the circumstances, uncalled for. it also voted to hold no intercourse with great britain, and decided not to visit shakespeare's grave unless the mother-country should apologize.
in 1775, on the 19th of april, general gage sent out troops to see about some military stores at concord, but at lexington he met with a company of minute-men gathering on the village green. major pitcairn, who was in command of the tommies, rode up to the minute-men, and, drawing his bright new sheffield sword, exclaimed, "disperse, you rebels! throw down your arms and disperse!" or some such remark as that.
the americans hated to do that, so they did not. in the skirmish that ensued, seven of their number were killed.
thus opened the revolutionary war, a contest which but for the earnestness and irritability of the americans would have been extremely brief. it showed the relative difference between the fighting qualities of soldiers who fight for two pounds ten shillings per month and those who fight because they have lost their temper.
the regulars destroyed the stores, but on the way home they found every rock-pile hid an old-fashioned gun and minute-man. this shows that there must have been an enormous number of minute-men then. all the english who got back to boston were those who went out to reinforce the original command.
the news went over the country like wildfire. these are the words of the historian. really, that is a poor comparison, for wildfire doesn't jump rivers and bays, or get up and eat breakfast by candle-light in order to be on the road and spread the news.
general putnam left a pair of tired steers standing in the furrow, and rode one hundred miles without feed or water to boston.
twenty thousand men were soon at work building intrenchments around boston, so that the english troops could not get out to the suburbs where many of them resided.
i will now speak of the battle of bunker hill.
this battle occurred june 17. the americans heard that their enemy intended to fortify bunker hill, and so they determined to do it themselves, in order to have it done in a way that would be a credit to the town.
a body of men under colonel prescott, after prayer by the president of harvard university, marched to charlestown neck. they decided to fortify breed's hill, as it was more commanding, and all night long they kept on fortifying. the surprise of the english at daylight was well worth going from lowell to witness.
howe sent three thousand men across and formed them on the landing. he marched them up the hill to within ten rods of the earth-works, when it occurred to prescott that it would now be the appropriate thing to fire.
he made a statement of that kind to his troops, and those of the enemy who were alive went back to charlestown. but that was no place for them, as they had previously set it afire, so they came back up the hill, where they were once more well received and tendered the freedom of a future state.
three times the english did this, when the ammunition in the fortifications gave out, and they charged with fixed bayonets and reinforcements.
the americans were driven from the field, but it was a victory after all. it united the colonies and made them so vexed at the english that it took some time to bring on an era of good feeling.
lord howe, referring afterwards to this battle, said that the americans did not stand up and fight like the regulars, suggesting that thereafter the colonial army should arrange itself in the following manner before a battle!
however, the suggestion was not acted on. the colonial soldiers declined to put on a bright red coat and a pill-box cap, that kept falling off in battle, thus delaying the carnage, but preferred to wear homespun which was of a neutral shade, and shoot their enemy from behind stumps. they said it was all right to dress up for a muster, but they preferred their working-clothes for fighting. after the war a statistician made the estimate that nine per cent. of the british troops were shot while ascertaining if their caps were on straight.[4]
general israel putnam was known as the champion rough rider of his day, and once when hotly pursued rode down three flights of steps, which, added to the flight he made from the english soldiers, made four flights. putnam knew not fear or cowardice, and his name even to-day is the synonyme for valor and heroism.
chapter xv.
benjamin franklin, ll.d., ph.g., f.r.s., etc.
it is considered advisable by the historian at this time to say a word regarding dr. franklin, our fellow-townsman, and a journalist who was the charles a. dana of his time.
franklin's memory will remain green when the names of the millionaires of to-day are forgotten. coextensive with the name of e. rosewater of the omaha bee we will find that of benjamin franklin, whose bust sits above the fireplace of the writer at this moment, while a large etruscan hornet is making a phrenological examination of same.
but let us proceed to more fully mark out the life and labors of this remarkable man.
benjamin franklin, formerly of boston, came very near being an only child. if seventeen children had not come to bless the home of benjamin's parents they would have been childless. think of getting up in the morning and picking out your shoes and stockings from among seventeen pairs of them!
imagine yourself a child, gentle reader, in a family where you would be called upon every morning to select your own cud of spruce gum from a collection of seventeen similar cuds stuck on a window-sill! and yet benjamin franklin never murmured or repined. he desired to go to sea, and to avoid this he was apprenticed to his brother james, who was a printer.
it is said that franklin at once took hold of the great archimedean lever, and jerked it early and late in the interests of freedom.
it is claimed that franklin, at this time, invented the deadly weapon known as the printer's towel. he found that a common crash towel could be saturated with glue, molasses, antimony, concentrated lye, and roller-composition, and that after a few years of time and perspiration it would harden so that "a constant reader" or "veritas" could be stabbed with it and die soon.
many believe that franklin's other scientific experiments were productive of more lasting benefit to mankind than this, but i do not agree with them.
his paper was called the new england courant. it was edited jointly by james and benjamin franklin, and was started to supply a long-felt want.
benjamin edited it a part of the time, and james a part of the time. the idea of having two editors was not for the purpose of giving volume to the editorial page, but it was necessary for one to run the paper while the other was in jail.
in those days you could not sass the king, and then, when the king came in the office the next day and stopped his paper and took out his ad., put it off on "our informant" and go right along with the paper. you had to go to jail, while your subscribers wondered why their paper did not come, and the paste soured in the tin dippers in the sanctum, and the circus passed by on the other side.
how many of us to-day, fellow-journalists, would be willing to stay in jail while the lawn festival and the kangaroo came and went? who of all our company would go to a prison-cell for the cause of freedom while a double-column ad. of sixteen aggregated circuses, and eleven congresses of ferocious beasts, fierce and fragrant from their native lair, went by us?
at the age of seventeen ben got disgusted with his brother, and went to philadelphia and new york, where he got a chance to "sub" for a few weeks and then got a regular "sit."
franklin was a good printer, and finally got to be a foreman. he made an excellent foreman, sitting by the hour in the composing-room and spitting on the stove, while he cussed the make-up and press-work of the other papers. then he would go into the editorial rooms and scare the editors to death with a wild shriek for more copy.
he knew just how to conduct himself as a foreman so that strangers would think he owned the paper.
in 1730, at the age of twenty-four, franklin married, and established the pennsylvania gazette. he was then regarded as a great man, and almost every one took his paper.
franklin grew to be a great journalist, and spelled hard words with great fluency. he never tried to be a humorist in any of his newspaper work, and everybody respected him.
along about 1746 he began to study the habits and construction of lightning, and inserted a local in his paper in which he said that he would be obliged to any of his readers who might notice any new or odd specimens of lightning, if they would send them in to the gazette office for examination.
every time there was a thunderstorm franklin would tell the foreman to edit the paper, and, armed with a string and an old door-key, he would go out on the hills and get enough lightning for a mess.
in 1753 franklin was made postmaster of the colonies. he made a good postmaster-general, and people say there were fewer mistakes in distributing their mail then than there have ever been since. if a man mailed a letter in those days, old ben franklin saw that it went to where it was addressed.
franklin frequently went over to england in those days, partly on business and partly to shock the king. he liked to go to the castle with his breeches tucked in his boots, figuratively speaking, and attract a great deal of attention.
it looked odd to the english, of course, to see him come into the royal presence, and, leaning his wet umbrella up against the throne, ask the king, "how's trade?"
franklin never put on any frills, but he was not afraid of a crowned head. he used to say, frequently, that a king to him was no more than a seven-spot.
he did his best to prevent the revolutionary war, but he couldn't do it.
patrick henry had said that the war was inevitable, and had given it permission to come, and it came.
he also went to paris, and got acquainted with a few crowned heads there. they thought a good deal of him in paris, and offered him a corner lot if he would build there and start a paper. they also promised him the county printing; but he said, no, he would have to go back to america or his wife might get uneasy about him. franklin wrote "poor richard's almanac" in 1732 to 1757, and it was republished in england.
franklin little thought, when he went to the throne-room in his leather riding-clothes and hung his hat on the throne, that he was inaugurating a custom of wearing groom clothes which would in these days be so popular among the english.
dr. franklin entered philadelphia eating a loaf of bread and carrying a loaf under each arm, passing beneath the window of the girl to whom he afterwards gave his hand in marriage.
nearly everybody in america, except dr. mary walker, was once a poor boy.
chapter xvi.
the critical period.
ethan allen and benedict arnold on the 10th of may led two small companies to ticonderoga, a strong fortress tremendously fortified, and with its name also across the front door. ethan allen, a brave vermonter born in connecticut, entered the sally-port, and was shot at by a guard whose musket failed to report. allen entered and demanded the surrender of the fortress.
"by whose authority?" asked the commandant.
"by the authority of the great jehovah and the continental congress,"
said allen, brandishing his naked sword at a great rate.
"very well," said the officer: "if you put it on those grounds, all right, if you will excuse the appearance of things. we were just cleaning up, and everything is by the heels here."
"never mind," said allen, who was the soul of politeness. "we put on no frills at home, and so we are ready to take things as we find them."
the americans therefore got a large amount of munitions of war, both here and at crown point.
general washington was now appointed commander-in-chief of all the troops at the second session of the continental congress. on his arrival at boston there were only fourteen thousand men. he took command under the historic elm at cambridge. he was dressed in a blue broadcloth coat with flaps and revers of same, trimmed with large beautiful buttons. he also wore buff small-clothes, with openings at the sides where pockets are now put in, but at that time given up to space. they were made in such a way as to prevent the naked eye from discovering at once whether he was in advance or retreat. he also wore silk stockings and a cocked hat.
the lines of dryden starting off "mark his majestic fabric" were suggested by his appearance and general style. he always dressed well and rode a good horse, but at valley forge frosted his feet severely, and could have drawn a pension, "but no," said he, "i can still work at light employment, like being president, and so i will not ask for a pension."
each soldier had less than nine cartridges, but washington managed to keep general gage penned up in boston, and, as gage knew very few people there, it was a dull winter for him.
the boys of boston had built snow hills on the common, and used to slide down them to the ice below, but the british soldiers tore down their coasting-places and broke up the ice on the pond.
they stood it a long time, rebuilding their playground as often as it was torn down, until the spirit of american freedom could endure it no longer. they then organized a committee consisting of eight boys who were noted for their great philosophical research, and with charles sumner muzzy, the eloquent savant from milk street, as chairman, the committee started for general gage's head-quarters, to confer with him regarding the matter.
in the picture mr. muzzy is seen addressing general gage. the boy in the centre with the colored glasses is marco bozzaris cobb, who discovered and first brought into use the idea of putting new orleans molasses into boston brown bread. to the left of mr. cobb is mr. jehoab nye, who afterwards became the rev. jehoab nye and worked with heart and voice for over eight of the best years of his life against the immorality of the codfish-ball, before he learned of its true relations towards society.
above and between these two stands whomsoever j. opper, who wrote "how to make the garden pay" and "what responsible person will see that my grave is kept green?" in the background we see the tall form of wherewithal g. lumpy, who introduced the pompadour hair-cut into massachusetts and grew up to be a great man with enlarged joints but restricted ideas.
charles sumner muzzy addressed general gage at some length, somewhat to the surprise of gage, who admitted in a few well-chosen words that the committee was right, and that if he had his way about it there should be no more trouble.
charles was followed by marco bozzaris cobb, who spoke briefly of the boon of liberty, closing as follows: "we point with pride, sir, to the love of freedom, which is about the only excitement we have. we love our country, sir, whether we love anything else much or not. the distant wanderer of american birth, sir, pines for his country. 'oh, give me back,' he goes on to say, 'my own fair land across the bright blue sea, the land of beauty and of worth, the bright land of the free, where tyrant foot hath never trod, nor bigot forged a chain. oh, would that i were safely back in that bright land again!'"
mr. wherewithal g. lumpy said he had hardly expected to be called upon, and so had not prepared himself, but this occasion forcibly brought to his mind the words also of the poet, "our country stands," said he, "with outstretched hands appealing to her boys; from them must flow her weal or woe, her anguish or her joys. a ship she rides on human tides which rise and sink anon: each giant wave may prove her grave, or bear her nobly on. the friends of right, with armor bright, a valiant christian band, through god her aid may yet be made, a blessing to our land."
general gage was completely overcome, and asked for a moment to go apart and think it over, which he did, returning with an air which reminded one of "ten nights in a bar-room."
"you may go, my brave boys; and be assured that if my troops molest you in the future, or anywhere else, i will overpower them and strew the common with their corses.
"of corse he will," said the hairy boy to the right of whomsoever j.
opper, who afterwards became the father of a lad who grew up to be editor of the persiflage column of the atlantic monthly.
thus the boys of america impressed general gage with their courage and patriotism and grew up to be good men.
an expedition to canada was fitted out the same winter, and an attack made on quebec, in which general montgomery was killed and benedict arnold showed that he was a brave soldier, no matter how the historian may have hopped on him afterwards.
the americans should not have tried to take canada. canada was, as henry clay once said, a persimmon a trifle too high for the american pole, and it is the belief of the historian, whose tears have often wet the pages of this record, that in the future canada will be what america is now, a free country with a national debt of her own, a flag of her own, an executive of her own, and a regular annual crisis of her own, like other nations.
in 1776 boston was evacuated. washington, in order to ascertain whether lord howe had a call to fish, cut bait, or go ashore, began to fortify dorchester heights, march 17, and on the following morning he was not a little surprised to note the change. as the weather was raw, and he had been in-doors a good deal during the winter, lord howe felt the cold very keenly. he went to the window and looked at the americans, but he would come back chilly and ill-tempered to the fire each time. finally he hitched up and went away to halifax, where he had acquaintances.
on june 28 an attack was made by the english on fort moultrie. it was built of palmetto logs, which are said to be the best thing in the world to shoot into if one wishes to recover the balls and use them again.
palmetto logs accept and retain balls for many years, and are therefore good for forts.
when the fleet got close enough to the fort so that the brave charlestonians could see the expression on the admiral's face, they turned loose with everything they had, grape, canister, solid shot, chain-shot, bar-shot, stove-lids, muffin-irons, newspaper cuts, etc., etc., so that the decks were swept of every living thing except the admiral.
general clinton by land tried to draw the attention of the rear gunners of the fort, but he was a poor draughtsman, and so retired, and both the land and naval forces quit charleston and went to new york, where board was not so high.
july 4 was deemed a good time to write a declaration of independence and have it read in the grove.
richard henry lee, of virginia, moved that "the united colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states." john adams, of massachusetts, seconded the resolution. this was passed july 2, and the report of the committee appointed to draw up a declaration of independence was adopted july 4.
the declaration was dictated by thomas jefferson, who wrote the most melodious english of any american of his time.
jefferson had a vocabulary next to noah webster, with all the dramatic power of dan. he composed the piece one evening after his other work. we give a facsimile of the opening lines.
philadelphia was a scene of great excitement. the streets were thronged, and people sat down on the nice clean door-steps with perfect recklessness, although the steps had just been cleaned with ammonia and wiped off with a chamois-skin. it was a day long to be remembered, and one that made george iii. wish that he had reconsidered his birth.
in the steeple of the old state-house was a bell which had fortunately upon it the line "proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof." it was rung by the old man in charge, though he had lacked faith up to that moment in congress. he believed that congress would not pass the resolution and adopt the declaration till after election.
thus was the era of good feeling inaugurated both north and south. there was no north then, no south, no east, no west; just one common country, with washington acting as father of same. oh, how nice it must have been!
washington was one of the sweetest men in the united states. he gave his hand in marriage to a widow woman who had two children and a dark red farm in virginia.
chapter xvii.
the beginning of the end.
the british army now numbered thirty thousand troops, while washington's entire command was not over seven thousand strong. the howes, one a general and the other an admiral, now turned their attention to new york. washington, however, was on the ground beforehand.
howe's idea was to first capture brooklyn, so that he could have a place in which to sleep at nights while engaged in taking new york.
the battle was brief. howe attacked the little army in front, while general clinton got around by a circuitous route to the rear of the colonial troops and cut them off. the americans lost one thousand men by death or capture. the prisoners were confined in the old sugar-house on liberty street, where they suffered the most miserable and indescribable deaths.
the army of the americans fortunately escaped by fulton ferry in a fog, otherwise it would have been obliterated. washington now fortified harlem heights, and later withdrew to white plains. afterwards he retired to a fortified camp called north castle.
howe feared to attack him there, and so sent the hessians, who captured fort washington, november 16.
it looked scaly for the americans, as motley says, and philadelphia bade fair to join new york and other cities held by the british. the english van could be seen from the colonial rear column. the american troops were almost barefooted, and left their blood-stained tracks on the frozen road.
it was at this time that washington crossed the delaware and thereby found himself on the other side; while howe decided to remain, as the river was freezing, and when the ice got strong enough, cross over and kill the americans at his leisure. had he followed the colonial army, it is quite sure now that the english would have conquered, and the author would have been the duke of sandy bottom, instead of a plain american citizen, unknown, unhonored, and unsung.
washington decided that he must strike a daring blow while his troops had any hope or vitality left; and so on christmas night, after crossing the delaware as shown elsewhere, he fell on the hessians at trenton in the midst of their festivities, captured one thousand prisoners, and slew the leader.
the hessians were having a symposium at the time, and though the commander received an important note of warning during the christmas dinner, he thrust it into his pocket and bade joy be unconfined.
when daylight came, the hessians were mostly moving in alcoholic circles trying to find their guns. washington lost only four men, and two of those were frozen to death.
the result of this fight gave the colonists courage and taught them at the same time that it would be best to avoid new jersey symposiums till after the war was over.
having made such a hit in crossing the delaware, washington decided to repeat the performance on the 3d of january. he was attacked at trenton by cornwallis, who is known in history for his justly celebrated surrender. he waited till morning, having been repulsed at sundown.
washington left his camp-fires burning, surrounded the british, captured two hundred prisoners, and got away to morristown heights in safety. if the ground had not frozen, general washington could not have moved his forty cannon; but, fortunately, the thermometer was again on his side, and he never lost a gun.
september 11 the english got into the chesapeake, and washington announced in the papers that he would now fight the battle of the brandywine, which he did.
marie jean paul roch yves gilbert motier, marquis de la fayette, fought bravely with the americans in this battle, twice having his name shot from under him.
the patriots were routed, scoring a goose-egg and losing philadelphia.
october 4, washington attacked the enemy at germantown, and was beaten back just as victory was arranging to perch on his banner. poor washington now retired to valley forge, where he put in about the dullest winter of his life.
the english had not been so successful in the north. at first the americans could only delay burgoyne by felling trees in the path of his eight thousand men, which is a very unsatisfactory sort of warfare, but at last schuyler, who had borne the burden and heat of the day, was succeeded by gates, and good luck seemed to come slowly his way.
a foolish boy with bullet-holes cut in his clothes ran into st. leger's troops, and out of breath told them to turn back or they would fill a drunkard's grave. officers asked him about the numbers of the enemy, and he pointed to the leaves of the trees, shrieked, and ran for his life.
he ran several days, and was barely able to keep ahead of st. leger's troops by a neck.
burgoyne at another time sent a detachment under colonel baum to take the stores at bennington, vermont. he was met by general stark and the militia. stark said, "here come the redcoats, and we must beat them to-day, or molly stark is a widow." this neat little remark made an instantaneous hit, and when they counted up their string of prisoners at night they found they had six hundred souls and a hessian.
burgoyne now felt blue and unhappy. besides, his troops were covered with wood-ticks and had had no washing done for three weeks.
he moved southward and attacked gates at bemis heights, or, as a british wit had it, "gave gates ajar," near saratoga. a wavering fight occupied the day, and then both armies turned in and fortified for two weeks.
burgoyne saw that he was running out of food, and so was first to open fire.
arnold, who had been deprived of his command since the last battle, probably to prevent his wiping out the entire enemy and getting promoted, was so maddened by the conflict that he dashed in before gates could put him in the guard-house, and at the head of his old command, and without authority or hat, led the attack. gates did not dare to come where arnold was, to order him back, for it was a very warm place where arnold was at the time. the enemy was thus driven to camp.
arnold was shot in the same leg that was wounded at quebec; so he was borne back to the extreme rear, where he found gates eating a doughnut and speaking disrespectfully of arnold.
a council was now held in burgoyne's tent, and on the question of renewing the fight stood six to six, when an eighteen-pound hot shot went through the tent, knocking a stylographic pen out of general burgoyne's hand. almost at once he decided to surrender, and the entire army of six thousand men was surrendered, together with arms, portable bath-tubs, and leather hat-boxes. the americans marched into their camp to the tune of yankee doodle, which is one of the most impudent compositions ever composed.
during the valley forge winter (1777-78) continental currency depreciated in value so that an officer's pay would not buy his clothes.
many, having also spent their private funds for the prosecution of the war, were obliged to resign and hire out in the lumber woods in order to get food for their families. troops had no blankets, and straw was not to be had. it was extremely sad; but there was no wavering. officers were approached by the enemy with from one hundred to one thousand pounds if they would accept and use their influence to effect a reconciliation; but, with blazing eye and unfaltering attitude, each stated that he was not for sale, and returned to his frozen mud-hole to rest and dream of food and freedom.
those were the untitled nobility from whom we sprung. let us look over our personal record and see if we are living lives that are worthy of such heroic sires.
five minutes will now be given the reader to make a careful examination of his personal record.
in the spring the joyful news came across the sea that, through the efforts of benjamin franklin, france had acknowledged the independence of the united states, and a fleet was on the way to assist the struggling troops.
the battle of monmouth occurred june 28. clinton succeeded howe, and, alarmed by the news of the french fleet, the government ordered clinton to concentrate his troops near new york, where there were better facilities for getting home.
washington followed the enemy across new jersey, overtaking them at monmouth. lee was in command, and got his men tangled in a swamp where the mosquitoes were quite plenty, and, losing courage, ordered a retreat.
washington arrived at that moment, and bitterly upbraided lee. he used the flanders method of upbraiding, it is said, and lee could not stand it. he started towards the enemy in preference to being there with washington, who was still rebuking him. the fight was renewed, and all day long they fought. when night came, clinton took his troops with him and went away where they could be by themselves.
an effort was made to get up a fight between the french fleet and the english at newport for the championship, but a severe storm came up and prevented it.
in july the wyoming massacre, under the management of the tories and indians, commanded by butler, took place in that beautiful valley near wilkes barre, pennsylvania.
this massacre did more to make the indians and tories unpopular in this country than any other act of the war. the men were away in the army, and the women, children, and old men alone were left to the vengeance of the two varieties of savage. the indians had never had gospel privileges, but the tories had. otherwise they resembled each other.
in 1779 the english seemed to have georgia and the south pretty well to themselves. prevost, the english general, made an attack on charleston, but, learning that lincoln was after him, decided that, as he had a telegram to meet a personal friend at savannah, he would go there. in september, lincoln, assisted by the french under d'estaing, attacked savannah. one thousand lives were lost, and d'estaing showed the white feather to advantage. count pulaski lost his life in this fight. he was a brave polish patriot, and his body was buried in the savannah river.
the capture of stony point about this time by "mad anthony wayne" was one of the most brilliant battles of the war.
learning the countersign from a negro who sold strawberries to the british, the troops passed the guard over the bridge that covered the marsh, and, gagging the worthy inside guard, they marched up the hill with fixed bayonets and fixed the enemy to the number of six hundred.
the countersign was, "the fort is won," and so it was, in less time than it takes to ejaculate the word "scat!" wayne was wounded at the outset, but was carried up the hill in command, with a bandage tied about his head. he was a brave man, and never knew in battle what fear was. yet, strange to say, a bat in his bed would make him start up and turn pale.
chapter xviii.
the close of the revolution.
the atrocities introduced into this country by the tories and indians caused general sullivan to go out against the measly enemy, whip him near elmira, and destroy the fields of corn and villages in the genesee country, where the indian women were engaged in farming while their men-folks attended to the massacre industry.
the weak point with the americans seemed to be lack of a suitable navy.
a navy costs money, and the colonists were poor. in 1775 they fitted out several swift sailing-vessels, which did good service. inside of five years they captured over five hundred ships, cruised among the british isles, and it is reported that they captured war-vessels that were tied to the english wharves.
paul jones had a method of running his vessel alongside the enemy's, lashing the two together, and then having it out with the crew, generally winning in a canter. his idea in lashing the two ships together was to have one good ship to ride home on. generally it was the one he captured, while his own, which was rotten, was allowed to go down. this was especially the case in the fight between the richard and the serapis, september 23, 1779.
in 1780 the war was renewed in south carolina. charleston, after a forty days' siege, was forced to surrender. gates now took charge of the south, and also gave a sprinting exhibition at camden, where he was almost wiped off the face of the earth. he had only two troops left at the close of the battle, and they could not keep up with gates in the retreat. this battle and the retreat overheated gates and sowed the seeds of heart-disease, from which he never recovered. he should have chosen a more peaceful life, such as the hen-traffic, or the growth of asparagus for the market.
benedict arnold has been severely reproached in history, but he was a brave soldier, and possibly serving under gates, who jealously kept him in the background, had a good deal to do with the little european dicker which so darkened his brilliant career as a soldier.
unhappy man! he was not well received in england, and, though a brilliant man, was forced to sit in a corner evening after evening and hear the english tell his humorous stories as their own.
the carolinas were full of tories, and opposition to english rule was practically abandoned in the south for the time, with the exception of that made in a desultory swamp-warfare by the partisan bands with such leaders as marion, sumter, and pickens.
two hundred thousand dollars of continental money was the sum now out.
forty dollars of it would buy one dollar's worth of groceries; but the grocer had to know the customer pretty well, and even then it was more to accommodate than anything else that he sold at that price.
the british flooded the country with a counterfeit that was rather better-looking than the genuine: so that by the time a man had paid six hundred dollars for a pair of boots, and the crooked bills had been picked out and others substituted, it made him feel that starting a republic was a mighty unpopular job.
general arnold had married a tory lady, and lived in philadelphia while recovering from his wounds received at quebec and saratoga. he was rather a high roller, and ran behind, so that it is estimated that his bills there per month required a peach-basket-full of currency with which to pay them, as the currency was then quoted. besides, gates had worried him, and made him think that patriotism was mostly politics. he was also overbearing, and the people of philadelphia mobbed him once. he was reprimanded gently by washington, but arnold was haughty and yet humiliated. he got command of west point, a very important place indeed, and then arranged with clinton to swap it for six thousand three hundred and fifteen pounds and a colonelcy in the english army.
major andré was appointed to confer with arnold, and got off the ship vulture to make his way to the appointed place, but it was daylight by that time, and the vulture, having been fired on, dropped down the river. andré now saw no way for him but to get back to new york; but at tarrytown he was met by three patriots, who caught his horse by the reins, and, though andré tried to tip them, he did not succeed. they found papers on his person, among them a copy of punch, which made them suspicious that he was not an american, and so he was tried and hanged as a spy. this was one of the saddest features of the american revolution, and should teach us to be careful how we go about in an enemy's country, also to use great care in selecting and subscribing for papers.
in 1781, greene, who succeeded gates, took charge of the two thousand ragged and bony troops. january 17 he was attacked at cowpens by tarleton. the militia fell back, and the english made a grand charge, supposing victory to be within reach. but the wily and foxy troops turned at thirty yards and gave the undertaking business a boom that will never be forgotten.
morgan was in command of the colonial forces. he went on looking for more regulars to kill, but soon ran up against cornwallis the surrenderer.
general greene now joined morgan, and took charge of the retreat. at the yadkin river they crossed over ahead of cornwallis, when it began for to rain. when cornwallis came to the river he found it so swollen and restless that he decided not to cross. later he crossed higher up, and made for the fords of the dan at thirty miles a day, to head off the americans. greene beat him, however, by a length, and saved his troops.
the writer has seen the place on the yadkin where cornwallis decided not to cross. it was one of the pivotal points of the war, and is of about medium height.
a fight followed at guilford court-house, where the americans were driven back, but the enemy got thinned out so noticeably that cornwallis decided to retreat. he went back to washington on a bull run schedule, without pausing even for feed or water. cornwallis was greatly agitated, and the coat he wore at the time, and now shown in the smithsonian institution, shows distinctly the marks made where the colonists played checkers on the tail.
the battle of eutaw springs, september 8, also greatly reduced the british forces at that point.
arnold conducted a campaign into virginia, and was very brutal about it, killing a great many people who were strangers to him, and who had never harmed him, not knowing him, as the historian says, from "adam's off ox."
cornwallis in this virginia and southern trip destroyed ten million dollars' worth of property, and then fortified himself at yorktown.
washington decided to besiege yorktown, and, making a feint to fool clinton, set out for that place, visiting mount vernon en route after an absence of six and a half years, though only stopping two days.
washington was a soldier in the true sense, and, when a lad, was given a little hatchet by his father. george cut down some cherry-trees with this, in order to get the cherries without climbing the trees. one day his father discovered that the trees had been cut down, and spoke of it to the lad.
"yes," said george, "i did it with my little hatchet; but i would rather cut down a thousand cherry-trees and tell the truth about it than be punished for it."
"well said, my brave boy!" exclaimed the happy father as he emptied george's toy bank into his pocket in payment for the trees. "you took the words right out of my mouth."
in speaking of the siege of yorktown, the historian says, "the most hearty good will prevailed." what more could you expect of a siege than that?
cornwallis capitulated october 19. it was the most artistic capitulation he had ever given. the troops were arranged in two lines facing each other, british and american with their allies the french under rochambeau.
people came from all over the country who had heard of cornwallis and his wonderful genius as a capitulator. they came for miles, and brought their lunches with them; but the general, who felt an unnecessary pique towards washington, refused to take part in the exercises himself, claiming that by the advice of his physicians he would have to remain in his tent, as they feared that he had over-capitulated himself already.
he therefore sent his sword by general o'hara, and washington turned it over to lincoln, who had been obliged to surrender to the english at charleston.
the news reached philadelphia in the night, and when the watchman cried, "past two o'clock, and cornwallis is taken!" the people arose and went and prayed and laughed like lunatics, for they regarded the war as virtually ended. the old door-keeper of congress died of delight. thanks were returned to almighty god, and george washington's nomination was a sure thing.
england decided that whoever counselled war any further was a public enemy, and lord north, then prime minister, when he heard of the surrender of cornwallis through a new york paper, exclaimed, "oh, god!
it is all over!"
washington now showed his sagacity in quelling the fears of the soldiers regarding their back pay. he was invited to become king, but, having had no practice, and fearing that he might run against a coup d'état or faux pas, he declined, and spoke kindly against taking violent measures.
in 1783, september 3, a treaty of peace was signed in paris, and washington, delivering the most successful farewell address ever penned, retired to mount vernon, where he began at once to enrich his farm with the suggestions he had received during his absence, and to calmly take up the life that had been interrupted by the tedious and disagreeable war.
the country was free and independent, but, oh, how ignorant it was about the science of government! the author does not wish to be personal when he states that the country at that time did not know enough about affairs to carry water for a circus elephant.
it was heavily in debt, with no power to raise money. new england refused to pay her poll-tax, and a party named shays directed his hired man to overturn the government; but a felon broke out on his thumb, and before he could put it down the crisis was averted and the country saved.
chapter xix.
the first president.
it now became the duty of the new republic to seek out the man to preside over it, and george washington seems to have had no rivals. he rather reluctantly left his home at mount vernon, where he was engaged in trying the rotation of crops, and solemnly took the oath to support the constitution of the united states, which had been adopted september 17, 1787. his trip in april, 1789, from mount vernon to the seat of government in new york was a simple but beautiful ovation.
everybody tried to make it pleasant for him. he was asked at all the towns to build there, and 'most everybody wanted him "to come and make their house his home." when he got to the ferry he was not pushed off into the water by commuters, but lived to reach the old federal hall, where he was sworn in.
in 1791 the seat of government was removed to philadelphia, where it remained for ten years, after which the united states took advantage of the homestead act and located on a tract of land ten miles square, known as the district of columbia. in 1846 that part of the district lying on the virginia side of the potomac was ceded back to the state.
president washington did not have to escape from the capital to avoid office-seekers. he could get on a horse at his door and in five minutes be out of sight. he could remain in the forest back of his house until martha blew the horn signifying that the man who wanted the post-office at pigback had gone, and then he could return.
how times have changed with the growth of the republic! now pigback has grown so that the name has been changed to hogback, and the president avails himself of every funeral that he can possibly feel an interest in, to leave the swarm of jobless applicants who come to pester him to death for appointments.
the historian begs leave to say here that the usefulness of the president for the good of his country and the consideration of greater questions will some day be reduced to very little unless he may be able to avoid this effort to please voters who overestimate their greatness.
it is said that washington had no library, which accounted for his originality. he was a vestryman in the episcopal church; and to see his tall and graceful form as he moved about from pew to pew collecting pence for home missions, was a lovely sight.
as a boy he was well behaved and a careful student.
at one time he was given a hatchet by his father, which
but what has the historian to do with this morbid wandering in search of truth?
things were very much unsettled. england had not sent a minister to this country, and had arranged no commercial treaty with us.
washington's cabinet consisted of three portfolios and a rack in which he kept his flute-music.
the three ministers were the secretary of state, the secretary of war, and the secretary of the treasury. there was no attorney-general, or postmaster-general, or secretary of the interior, or of the navy, or seed catalogue secretary.
hamilton, the secretary of the treasury, advised that congress at the earliest moment provide itself with a national debt, which was done, the war debt being assumed by the congressional representatives of the thirteen colonies.
a tax was levied on spirits, and a mint started, combining the two, and making the mint encourage the consumption of spirits, and thus the increase of the tax, very likely.
a whiskey rebellion broke out in 1794. pennsylvania especially rebelled at the tax on this grocery, but it was put down. (those wishing to know which was put down will find out by consulting the appendix, which will be issued a year from this winter.)
a few indian wars now kept the people interested, and a large number of the red brothers, under little turtle, soon found themselves in the soup, as washington put it so tersely in his message the following year.
twenty-five thousand square miles north of the ohio were obtained by treaty from the indians.
england claimed that traffic with america was not desirable, as the americans did not pay their debts. possibly that was true, for muskrat pelts were low at that time, and england refused to take cord-wood and saw-logs piled on the new york landing as cash.
chief-justice jay was sent to london to confer with the king, which he did. he was not invited, however, to come to the house during his stay, and the queen did not call on mrs. jay. the jays have never recovered from this snub, and are still gently guyed by the comic papers.
but the treaty was negotiated, and now the americans are said to pay their debts as well as the nobility who marry our american girls instead of going into bankruptcy, as some would do.
the mississippi and the mediterranean sea were opened for navigation to american vessels now, and things looked better, for we could by this means exchange our cranberries for sugar and barter our indian relics for camel's-hair shawls, of which the pioneers were very much in need during the rigorous winters in the north.
the french now had a difficulty with england, and washington, who still remembered la fayette and the generous aid of the french, wished that he was back at mount vernon, working out his poll-tax on the virginia roads, for he was in a tight place.
it was now thought best to have two political parties, in order to enliven editorial thought and expression. so the republican party, headed by jefferson, madison, and randolph, and the federalist party, led by hamilton and adams, were organized, and public speakers were engaged from a distance.
the latter party supported the administration, which was not so much of a job as it has been several times since.
washington declined to accept a third term, and wrote a first-rate farewell address. a lady, whose name is withheld, writing of those times, closes by saying that president washington was one of the sweetest men she ever knew.
john adams succeeded washington as president, and did not change his politics to amount to much.
he made a good record as congressman, but lost it as president largely because of his egotism. he seemed to think that if he neglected to oil the gearing of the solar system about so often, it would stop running.
we should learn from this to be humble even when we are in authority.
adams and jefferson were good friends during the revolution, but afterwards political differences estranged them till they returned to private life. adams was a poor judge of men, and offended several members of the press who called on him to get his message in advance.
our country was on the eve of a war with france, when napoleon i. was made consul, and peace followed.
adams's administration made the federalists unpopular, owing to the alien and sedition laws, and jefferson was elected the successor of adams, burr running as vice-president with him. the election was so close that it went to the house, however.
jefferson, or the sage of monticello, was a good president, noted for his simplicity. he married and brought his bride home to monticello prior to this. she had to come on horseback about one hundred miles, and, as the house was unfinished and no servants there, they had to sleep on the work-bench and eat what was left of the carpenter's lunch.
jeffersonian simplicity was his strong point, and people who called at the white house often found him sprinkling the floor of his office, or trying to start a fire with kerosene.
burr was vice-president, and, noticing at once that the office did not attract any attention to speak of, decided to challenge mr. alexander hamilton to fight a duel with him.
the affair took place at weehawken, july 11, 1804. hamilton fell at the first fire, on the same spot where his eldest son had been killed in the same way.
the artist has shown us how burr and hamilton should have fought, but, alas! they were not progressive men and did not realize this till too late. another method would have been to use the bloodless method of the french duel, or the newspaper customs adopted by the pugilists of 1893.
the time is approaching when mortal combat in america will be confined to belligerent people under the influence of liquor. a newspaper assault instead of a duel might have made burr president and hamilton vice-president.
burr went west, and was afterwards accused of treason on the ground that he was trying to organize mexico against the united states government.
he was put in a common jail to await trial. afterwards he was discharged, but was never again on good terms with the government, and never rose again.
when he came into town and registered at the hotel the papers did not say anything about it; and so he stopped taking them, thus falling into ignorance and oblivion at the same moment, although at one time he had lacked but a single vote to make him president of the united states.
england and france still continued at war, and american vessels were in hot water a good deal, as they were liable to be overhauled by both parties. england especially, with the excuse that she was looking for deserters, stopped american vessels and searched them, going through the sleeping-apartments before the work was done up, one of the rudest things known in international affairs.
an embargo act was passed forbidding american vessels to leave port, an act which showed that the bray of the ass had begun to echo through the halls of legislation even at that early day.
in the mean time, jefferson had completed his second term, and james madison, the republican candidate, had succeeded him at the helm of state, as it was then called.
his party favored a war with england, especially as the british had begun again to stir up the red brother.
madison was a virginian. he was a man of unblemished character, and was not too haughty to have fun sometimes. this endeared him to the whole nation. unlike adams, he never swelled up so that his dignity hurt him under the arms. he died in 1836, genial and sunny to the last.
it was now thought best to bring on the war of 1812, which began by an indian attack at tippecanoe on general harrison's troops in 1811, when the indians were defeated. june 19, 1812, war was finally declared.
the first battle was between the forces under general hull on our side and the english and indians on the british side, near detroit. the troops faced each other, tecumseh being the indian leader, and both armies stood ready to have one of the best battles ever given in public or private, when general hull was suddenly overcome with remorse at the thought of shedding blood, especially among people who were so common, and, shaking a large table-cloth out the window in token of peace, amid the tears of his men, surrendered his entire command in a way that reminded old settlers very much of cornwallis.
chapter xx.
the war with canada.
october 13, general van rensselaer crossed the niagara river and attacked the british at queenstown heights. the latter retreated, and general brock was killed. general van rensselaer went back after the rest of his troops, but they refused to cross, on the ground that the general had no right to take them out of the united states, and thus the troops left in charge at the heights were compelled to surrender.
these troops who refused to go over and accept a victory already won for them, because they didn't want to cross the canadian line, would not have shied so at the boundary if they had been boodlers, very likely, in later years.
august 19 occurred the naval fight between the constitution and guerriere, off the massachusetts coast. the constitution, called "old ironsides," was commanded by captain isaac hull. the guerriere was first to attack, but got no reply until both vessels were very close together, when into her starboard captain hull poured such a load of hardware that the guerriere was soon down by the head and lop-sided on the off side. she surrendered, but was of no value, being so full of holes that she would not hold a cargo of railroad-trestles.
the economy used by the early american warriors by land and sea regarding their ammunition, holding their fire until the enemy was at arm's length, was the cause of more than one victory. they were obliged, indeed, to make every bullet count in the days when even lead was not produced here, and powder was imported.
october 13, the naval fight between the frolic and wasp took place, off the north carolina coast. the frolic was an english brig, and she wound up as most frolics do, with a severe pain and a five-dollar fine. after the wasp had called and left her r. s. v. p. cards, the decks of the frolic were a sight to behold. there were not enough able-bodied men to surrender the ship. she was captured by the boarding-crew, but there was not a man left of her own crew to haul down the colors.
other victories followed on the sea, and american privateers had more fun than anybody.
madison was re-elected, thus showing that his style of administration suited one and all, and the war was prosecuted at a great rate. it became a sort of fight with canada, the latter being supported by english arms by land and sea. of course the americans would have preferred to fight england direct, and many were in favor of attacking london: but when the commanding officer asked those of the army who had the means to go abroad to please raise their right hands, it was found that the trip must be abandoned. those who had the means to go did not have suitable clothes for making a respectable appearance, and so it was given up.
three divisions were made of the army, all having an attack on canada as the object in view, viz., the army of the centre, the army of the north, and the army of the west. the armies of the centre and north did not do much, aside from the trifling victory at york, and president madison said afterwards in a letter to the writer's family that the two armies did not accomplish enough to pay the duty on them. the army of the west managed to stand off the british, though the latter still held michigan and threatened ohio.
september 10, perry's victory on lake erie occurred, and was well received. perry was twenty-seven years old, and was given command of a flotilla on lake erie, provided he would cut the timber and build it, meantime boarding himself. the british had long been in possession of lake erie, and when perry got his scows afloat they issued invitations for a general display of carnage. they bore down on perry and killed all the men on his flag-ship but eight. then he helped them fire the last gun, and with the flag they jumped into a boat which they paddled for the niagara under a galling fire. this was the first time that a galling fire had ever been used at sea. perry passed within pistol-shot of the british, and in less than a quarter of an hour after he trod the poop of the niagara he was able to write to general harrison, "we have met the enemy, and they are ours."
proctor and tecumseh were at malden, with english and indians, preparing to plunder the frontier and kill some more women and children as soon as they felt rested up. at the news of perry's victory, harrison decided to go over and stir them up. arriving at malden, he found it deserted, and followed the foe to the river thames, where he charged with his kentucky horsemen right through the british lines and so on down the valley, where they reformed and started back to charge on their rear, when the whole outfit surrendered except the indians. proctor, however, was mounted on a tall fox-hunter which ran away with him. he afterwards wrote back to general harrison that he made every effort to surrender personally, but that circumstances prevented. he was greatly pained by this.
the americans now charged on the indians, and johnson, the commander of the blue grass dragoons, fired a shot which took tecumseh just west of the watch-pocket. he died, he said, tickled to death to know that he had been shot by an american.
captain lawrence, of the hornet, having taken the british brig peacock, was given command of the chesapeake, which he took to boston to have repaired. while there, he got a challenge from the shannon. he put to sea with half a crew, and a shot in his chest that is, the arm-chest of the ship burst the whole thing open and annoyed every one on board. the enemy boarded the chesapeake and captured her, so captain lawrence, her brave commander, breathed his last, after begging his men not to give up the ship.
however, the victories on the canadian border settled the war once more for the time, and cheered the americans very much.
the indians in 1813 fell upon fort mimms and massacred the entire garrison, men, women, and children, not because they felt a personal antipathy towards them, but because they the red brothers had sold their lands too low and their hearts were sad in their bosoms. there is really no fun in trading with an indian, for he is devoid of business instincts, and reciprocity with the red brother has never been a success.
general jackson took some troops and attacked the red brother, killing six hundred of him and capturing the rest of the herd. jackson did not want to hear the indians speak pieces and see them smoke the pipe of peace, but buried the dead and went home. he had very little of the romantic complaint which now and then breaks out regarding the indian, but knew full well that all the indians ever born on the face of the earth could not compensate for the cruel and violent death of one good, gentle, patient american mother.
admiral cockburn now began to pillage the coast of the southern states and borrow communion services from the churches of virginia and the carolinas. he also murdered the sick in their beds.
perhaps a word of apology is due the indians after all. possibly they got their ideas from cockburn.
the battle of lundy's lane had been arranged for july 25, 1814, and so the americans crossed niagara under general brown to invade canada.
general winfield scott led the advance, and gained a brilliant victory, july 5, at chippewa. the second engagement was at lundy's lane, within the sound of the mighty cataract. old man lundy, whose lane was used for the purpose, said that it was one of the bloodiest fights, by a good many gallons, that he ever attended. the battle was, however, barren of results, the historian says, though really an american victory from the stand-point of the tactician and professional gore-spiller.
in september, sir george prevost took twelve thousand veteran troops who had served under wellington, and started for plattsburg. the ships of the british at the same time opened fire on the nine-dollar american navy, and were almost annihilated. the troops under prevost started in to fight, but, learning of the destruction of the british fleet on lake champlain, prevost fled like a frightened fawn, leaving his sick and wounded and large stores of lime-juice, porridge, and plum-pudding. the americans, who had been living on chopped horse-feed and ginseng-root, took a week off and gave themselves up to the false joys of lime-juice and general good feeling.
along the coast the british destroyed everything they could lay their hands on; but perhaps the rudest thing they did was to enter washington and burn the capitol, the congressional library, and the smoke-house in which president madison kept his hams. even now, when the writer is a guest of some great english dignitary, and perhaps at table picking the "merry-thought" of a canvas-back duck, the memory of this thing comes over him, and, burying his face in the costly napery, he gives himself up to grief until kind words and a celery-glass-full of turpentine, or something, bring back his buoyancy and rainbow smile. the hospitality and generous treatment of our english brother to americans now is something beautiful, unaffected, and well worth a voyage across the qualmy sea to see, but when cockburn burned down the capitol and took the president's sugar-cured hams he did a rude act.
chapter xxi.
the advance of the republic.
the administration now began to suffer at the hands of the people, many of whom criticised the conduct of the war and that of the president also. people met at hartford and spoke so harshly that the hartford federalist obtained a reputation which clung to him for many years.
there being no cable in those days, the peace by treaty of ghent was not heard of in time to prevent the battle of new orleans, january 8, 1815, there having been two weeks of peace as a matter of fact when this hot and fatal battle was fought.
general pakenham, with a force of twelve thousand men by sea and land, attacked the city. the land forces found general jackson intrenched several miles below the city. he had used cotton for fortifications at first, but a hot shot had set a big bunch of it on fire and rolled it over towards the powder-supplies, so that he did not use cotton any more.
general pakenham was met by the solid phalanx of tennessee and kentucky riflemen, who reserved their fire, as usual, until the loud uniform of the english could be distinctly heard, when they poured into their ranks a galling fire, as it was so tersely designated at the time. general pakenham fell mortally wounded, and his troops were repulsed, but again rallied, only to be again repulsed. this went on until night, when general lambert, who succeeded general pakenham, withdrew, hopelessly beaten, and with a loss of over two thousand men.
the united states now found that an honorable peace had been obtained, and with a debt of $127,000,000 started in to pay it up by instalments, which was done inside of twenty years from the ordinary revenue.
in the six years following, one state per year was added to the union, and all kinds of manufactures were built up to supply the goods that had been cut off by the blockade during the war. even the deluge of cheap goods from abroad after the war did not succeed in breaking these down.
james monroe was almost unanimously elected. he was generally beloved, and his administration was, in fact, known as the original "era of good feeling," since so successfully reproduced especially by the governors of north and south carolina. (see appendix.)
through the efforts of henry clay, missouri was admitted as a slave state in 1821, under the compromise that slavery should not be admitted into any of the territories west of the mississippi and north of parallel 36° 30' n.
clay was one of the greatest men of his time, and was especially eminent as an eloquent and magnetic speaker in the days when the record for eloquence was disputed by the giants of american oratory, and before the senate of the united states had become a wealthy club of men whose speeches are rarely printed except at so much per column, paid in advance.
clay was the original patentee of the slogan for campaign use.
lafayette revisited this country in 1819, and was greeted with the greatest hospitality. he visited the grave of washington, and tenderly spoke of the grandeur of character shown by his chief.
he was given the use of the brandywine, a government ship, for his return. as he stood on the deck of the vessel at pier 1, north river, his mind again recurred to washington, and to those on shore he said that "to show washington's love of truth, even as a child, he could tell an interesting incident of him relating to a little new hatchet given him at the time by his father." as he reached this point in his remarks, lafayette noted with surprise that some one had slipped his cable from shore and his ship was gently shoved off by people on the pier, while his voice was drowned in the notes of the new york oompah oompah band as it struck up "johnny, git yer gun."
florida was ceded to the united states in the same year by spain, and was sprinkled over with a light coating of sand for the waves to monkey with. the everglades of florida are not yet under cultivation.
mr. monroe became the author of what is now called the "monroe doctrine," viz., that the effort of any foreign country to obtain dominion in america would thereafter and forever afterwards be regarded as an unfriendly act. rather than be regarded as unfriendly, foreign countries now refrain from doing their dominion or dynasty work here.
the whigs now appeared, and the old republican party became known as the democratic party. john quincy adams and henry clay were whigs, and john c. calhoun and andrew jackson were democrats. the whigs favored a high protective tariff and internal improvement. the democrats did not favor anything especially, but bitterly opposed the whig measures, whatever they were.
in 1825, john quincy adams, son of john adams, was elected president, and served one term. he was a bald-headed man, and the country was given four years of unexampled prosperity. yet this experience has not been regarded by the people as it should have been. other kinds of men have repeatedly been elected to that office, only to bring sorrow, war, debt, and bank-failures upon us. sometimes it would seem to the thinking mind that, as a people, we need a few car-loads of sense in each school-district, where it can be used at a moment's notice.
adams was not re-elected, on account of his tariff ideas, which were not popular at the south. he was called "the old man eloquent," and it is said that during his more impassioned passages his head, which was round and extremely smooth, became flushed, so that, from resembling the cue-ball on the start, as he rose to more lofty heights his dome of thought looked more like the spot ball on a billiard-table. no one else in congress at that time had succeeded in doing this.
john quincy adams was succeeded in 1829 by andrew jackson, the hero of new orleans. jackson was the first to introduce what he called "rotation in office." during the forty years previous there had been but seventy-four removals; jackson made seven hundred. this custom has been pretty generally adopted since, giving immense satisfaction to those who thrive upon the excitement of offensive partisanship and their wives'
relations, while those who have legitimate employment and pay taxes support and educate a new official kindergarten with every change of administration.
the prophet sees in the distance an eight-year term for the president, and employment thereafter as "charge-d'affaires" of the united states, with permission to go beyond the seas. thus the vast sums of money and rivers of rum used in the intervening campaigns at present will be used for the relief of the widow and orphan. the ex-president then, with the portfolio of international press agent for the united states, could go abroad and be fêted by foreign governments, leaving dyspepsia everywhere in his wake and crowned heads with large damp towels on them.
every ex-president should have some place where he could go and hide his shame. a trip around the world would require a year, and by that time the voters would be so disgusted with the new president that the old one would come like a healing balm, and he would be permitted to die without publishing a bulletin of his temperature and showing his tongue to the press for each edition of the paper.
south carolina in 1832 passed a nullification act declaring the tariff act "null and void" and announcing that the state would secede from the union if force were used to collect any revenue at charleston. south carolina has always been rather "advanced" regarding the matter of seceding from the american union.
president jackson, however, ordered general scott and a number of troops to go and see that the laws were enforced; but no trouble resulted, and soon more satisfactory measures were enacted, through the large influence of mr. clay.
jackson was unfriendly to the bank of the united states, and the bank retaliated by contracting its loans, thus making money-matters hard to get hold of by the masses.
"when the public money," says the historian, "which had been withdrawn from the bank of the united states was deposited in local banks, money was easy and speculation extended to every branch of trade. new cities were laid out; fabulous prices were charged for building-lots which existed only on paper" etc. and in van buren's time the people paid the violinist, as they have in 1893, with ruin and remorse.
speculation which is unprofitable should never be encouraged.
unprofitable speculation is only another term for idiocy. but, on the other hand, profitable speculation leads to prosperity, public esteem, and the ability to keep a team. we may distinguish the one from the other by means of ascertaining the difference between them. if one finds on waking up in the morning that he experiences a sensation of being in the poor-house, he may almost at once jump to the conclusion that the kind of speculation he selected was the wrong one.
the black hawk war occurred in the northwest territory in 1832. it grew out of the fact that the sacs and foxes sold their lands to the united states and afterwards regretted that they had not asked more for them:
so they refused to vacate, until several of them had been used up on the asparagus-beds of the husbandman.
the florida war (1835) grew out of the fact that the seminoles regretted having made a dicker with the government at too low a price for land. osceola, the chief, regretted the matter so much that he scalped general thompson while the latter was at dinner, which shows that the indian is not susceptible to cultivation or the acquisition of any knowledge of table etiquette whatever. what could be in poorer taste than scalping a man between the soup and the remove? the same day major dade with one hundred men was waylaid, and all but four of the party killed.
seven years later the indians were subdued.
phrenologically the indian allows his alimentiveness to overbalance his group of organs which show veneration, benevolence, fondness for society, fêtes champêtres, etc., hope, love of study, fondness for agriculture, an unbridled passion for toil, etc.
france owed five million dollars for damages to our commerce in napoleon's wars, and, napoleon himself being entirely worthless, having said every time that the bill was presented that he would settle it as soon as he got back from st. helena, jackson ordered reprisals to be made, but england acted as a peacemaker, and the bill was paid. on receiving the money a trunk attached by our government and belonging to napoleon was released.
space here, and the nature of this work, forbid an extended opinion regarding the course pursued by napoleon in this matter. his tomb is in the basement of the hôtel des invalides in paris, and you are requested not to fumer while you are there.
chapter xxii.
more difficulties straightened out.
van buren, the eighth president, was unfortunate in taking the helm as the financial cyclone struck the country. this was brought about by scarcity of funds more than anything else. business-men would not pay their debts, and, though new york was not then so large as at present, one hundred million dollars were lost in sixty days in this way.
the government had required the payments for public lands to be made in coin, and so the treasury had plenty of gold and silver, while business had nothing to work with. speculation also had made a good many snobs who had sent their gold and silver abroad for foreign luxuries, also some paupers who could not do so. when a man made some money from the sale of rural lots he had his hats made abroad, and his wife had her dresses fitted in paris at great expense. confidence was destroyed, and the air was heavy with failures and apprehension of more failures to come.
the canadians rebelled against england, and many of our people wanted to unite with canada against the mother-country, but the police would not permit them to do so. general scott was sent to the frontier to keep our people from aiding the canadians.
there was trouble in the northeast over the boundary between maine and new brunswick, but it was settled by the commissioners, daniel webster and lord ashburton. webster was a smart man and a good extemporaneous speaker.
van buren failed of a re-election, as the people did not fully endorse his administration. administrations are not generally endorsed where the people are unable to get over six pounds of sugar for a dollar.
general harrison, who followed in 1841, died soon after choosing his cabinet, and his vice-president, john tyler, elected as a whig, proceeded to act as president, but not as a whig president should. his party passed a bill establishing the united states bank, but tyler vetoed it, and the men who elected him wished they had been as dead as rameses was at the time.
dorr's justly celebrated rebellion in rhode island was an outbreak resulting from restricting the right of suffrage to those who owned property. a new constitution was adopted, and dorr chosen as governor.
he was not recognized, and so tried to capture the seat while the regular governor was at tea. he got into jail for life, but was afterwards pardoned out and embraced the christian religion.
in 1844 the anti-rent war in the state of new york broke out among those who were tenants of the old "patroon estates." these men, disguised as indians, tarred and feathered those who paid rent, and killed the collectors who were sent to them. in 1846 the matter was settled by the military.
in 1840 the mormons had settled at nauvoo, illinois. they were led by joseph smith, and not only proposed to run a new kind of religion, but introduced polygamy into it. the people who lived near them attacked them, killed smith, and drove the mormons to iowa, opposite omaha.
in 1844 occurred the building of the magnetic telegraph, invented by samuel f. b. morse. the line was from baltimore to washington, or vice versa, authorities failing to agree on this matter. it cost thirty thousand dollars, and the boys who delivered the messages made more out of it then than the stockholders did.
fulton having invented and perfected the steamboat in 1805 and started the clermont on the north river at the dizzy rate of five miles per hour, and george stephenson having in 1814 made the first locomotive to run on a track, the people began to feel that theosophy was about all they needed to place them on a level with the seraphim and other astral bodies.
texas had, under the guidance of sam houston, obtained her independence from mexico, and asked for admission to the union. congress at first rejected her, fearing that the texas people lacked cultivation, being so far away from the thought-ganglia of the east, also fearing a war with mexico; but she was at last admitted, and now every one is glad of it.
the whigs were not in favor of the admission of texas, and made that the issue of the following campaign, henry clay leading his party to a hospitable grave in the fall. james k. polk, a democrat, was elected.
his rallying cry was, "i am a democrat."
the mexican war now came on. general taylor's army met the enemy first at palo alto, where he ran across the mexicans six thousand strong, and, though he had but two thousand men, drove them back, only losing nine men. this was the most economical battle of the war.
the next afternoon he met the enemy at resaca de la palma, and whipped him in the time usually required to ejaculate the word "scat!"
next general taylor proceeded against monterey, september 24, and with six thousand men attacked the strongly-fortified city, which held ten thousand troops. the americans avoided the heavy fire as well as possible by entering the city and securing rooms at the best hotel, leaving word at the office that they did not wish to be disturbed by the enemy. in fact, the soldiers did dig their way through from house to house to avoid the volleys from the windows, and thus fought to within a square of the grand plaza, when the city surrendered. the grand plaza is generally a sandy vacant lot, where mexicans sell tamales made of the highly-peppered but tempting cutlets of the mexican hairless dog.
the battle of buena vista took place february 23, 1847, general santa anna commanding the mexicans. he had twenty thousand men, and general taylor's troops were reduced in numbers. the fight was a hot one, lasting all day, and the americans were saved by bragg's artillery.
bragg used the old colonial method of rolling his guns up to the nose of the enemy and then discharging an iron-foundry into his midst. this disgusted the enemy so that general santa anna that evening took the shreds of his army and went away.
general kearney was sent to take new mexico and california. his work consisted mainly in marching for general frémont, who had been surveying a new route to oregon, and had with sixty men been so successful that on the arrival of kearney, with the aid of commodores sloat and stockton, california was captured, and has given general satisfaction to every one.
in march, 1847, general scott, with twelve thousand men, bombarded vera cruz four days, and at the end of that time the city was surrendered.
at cerro gordo, a week later, scott overtook the enemy under general santa anna, and made such a fierce attack that the mexicans were completely routed. santa anna left his leg on the field of battle and rode away on a pet mule named charlotte corday. the leg was preserved and taken to the smithsonian institute. it is made of second-growth hickory, and has a brass ferrule and a rubber eraser on the end. general taylor afterwards taunted him with this incident, and, though greatly irritated, santa anna said there was no use trying to kick.
puebla resisted not, and the army marched into the city of mexico august 7. the road was rendered disagreeable by strong fortifications and thirty thousand men who were not on good terms with scott. the environments and suburbs one after another were taken, and a parley for peace ensued, during which the mexicans were busy fortifying some more on the quiet.
september 8 the americans made their assault, and carried the outworks one by one. then the castle of chapultepec was stormed. first the outer works were scaled, which made them much more desirable, and the moat was removed by means of a stomach-pump and blotting-pad, and then the escarpment was up-ended, the don john tower was knocked silly by a solid shot, and the castle capitulated.
thus on the 14th of september the old flag floated over the court-house of mexico, and general scott ate his tea in the palace of the montezumas. peace was declared february 2, 1848, and the united states owned the vast country southward to the gila (pronounced heeler) and west to the pacific ocean.
the wilmot proviso was invented by david wilmot, a poor, struggling member of congress, who moved that in any territory acquired by the united states slavery should be prohibited except upon the advice of a physician. the motion was lost.
gold was discovered in the sacramento valley in august, 1848, by a workman who was building a mill-race. a struggle ensued over this ground as to who should own the race. it threatened to terminate in a race war, but was settled amicably.
in eighteen months one hundred thousand people went to the scene.
thousands left their skeletons with the red brother, and other thousands left theirs on the isthmus of panama or on the cruel desert. many married men went who had been looking a long time for some good place to go to. leaving their wives with ill-concealed relief, they started away through a country filled with death, to reach a country they knew not of. some died en route, others were hanged, and still others became the heads of new families. some came back and carried water for their wives to wash clothing for their neighbors.
it was a long hard trip then across the plains. one of the author's friends at the age of thirteen years drove a little band of cows from the state of indiana to sacramento. he says he would not do it again for anything. he is now a man, and owns a large prune-orchard in california, and people tell him he is getting too stout, and that he ought to exercise more, and that he ought to walk every day several miles; but he shakes his head, and says, "no, i will not walk any to-day, and possibly not to-morrow or the day following. do not come to me and refer to taking a walk: i have tried that. possibly you take me for a dromedary; but you are wrong. i am a fat man, and may die suddenly some day while lacing up my shoes, but when i go anywhere i ride."
when he got to sacramento, where gold was said to be so plentiful, he was glad to wash dishes for his board, and he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, and he sent him into the fields for to feed swine, and he would fain have filled his system with the california peaches which the swine did eat, and he began to be in want, and no man gave unto him, and if he had spent his substance in riotous living, he said, it would have been different.
about thirty years after that he arose and went unto his father, and carried his dinner with him, also a government bond and a new suit of raiment for the old gentleman.
i do not know what we should learn from this.
chapter xxiii.
the websters.
daniel webster, together with mr. clay, had much to do with the compromise measures of 1850. these consisted in the admission of california as a free state, the organizing of the territories of utah and new mexico without any provision regarding slavery pro or con, the payment to texas of one hundred million dollars for new mexico, which was a good trade for texas, the prohibition of the slave-trade in the district of columbia, and the enactment of a fugitive slave law permitting owners of slaves to follow them into the free states and take them back in irons, if necessary. the officials and farmers of the free states were also expected to turn out, call the dog, leave their work, and help catch these chattels and carry them to the south-bound train.
daniel webster was born in 1782, and noah in 1758. daniel was educated at dartmouth college, where he was admitted in 1797. he taught school winters and studied summers, as many other great men have done since, until he knew about everything that anybody could. what dan did not know, noah did.
strange to say, daniel was frightened to death when first called upon to speak a piece. he says he committed dozens of pieces to memory and recited them to the woods and crags and cows and stone abutments of the new england farms, but could not stand up before a school and utter a word.
in 1801 he studied law with thomas w. thompson, afterwards united states senator. he read then for the first time that "law is a rule of action prescribing what is right and prohibiting what is wrong."
in 1812 he was elected to congress, and in 1813 made his maiden speech.
one of his most masterly speeches was made on economical and financial subjects; and yet in order to get his blue broadcloth coat with brass buttons from the tailor-shop to wear while making the speech, he had to borrow twenty-five dollars.
when the country has wanted a man to talk well on these subjects it has generally been compelled to advance money to him before he could make a speech. sometimes he has to be taken from the pawn-shop. webster, it is said, was the most successful lawyer, after he returned to boston, that the state of massachusetts has ever known; and yet his mail was full of notices from banks down east, announcing that he had overdrawn his account.
once he was hard pressed for means, as he was trying to run a farm, and running a farm costs money: so he went to a bank to borrow. he hated to do it, because he had no special inducements to offer a bank or to make it hilariously loan him money.
"how much did you think you would need, mr. webster?" asked the president, cutting off some coupons as he spoke and making paper dolls of them.
"well, i could get along very well," said webster, in that deep, resinous voice of his, "if i could have two thousand dollars."
"well, you remember," said the banker, "do you not, that you have two thousand dollars here, that you deposited five years ago, after you had dined with the governor of north carolina?"
"no, i had forgotten about that," said webster. "give me a blank check without unnecessary delay."
we may learn from this that mr. webster was not a careful man in the matter of detail.
his speech on the two-hundredth anniversary of the landing of the pilgrims was a good thing, and found its way into the press of the time.
his speech at the laying of the corner-stone of the bunker hill monument, and his eulogy of adams and jefferson, were beautiful and thrilling.
daniel webster had a very large brain, and used to loan his hat to brother senators now and then when their heads were paining them, provided he did not want it himself.
his reply to robert y. hayne, of south carolina, in 1830, was regarded as one of his ablest parliamentary efforts. hayne attacked new england, and first advanced the doctrine of nullification, which was even more dangerous than secession, jefferson davis in 1860 denying that he had ever advocated or favored such a doctrine.
webster spoke extempore, and people sent out for their lunch rather than go away in the midst of his remarks.
webster married twice, but did not let that make any difference with his duty to his country.
he tried to farm it some, but did not amass a large sum, owing to his heavy losses in trying year after year to grow saratoga potatoes for the boston market.
no american, foreign or domestic, ever made a greater name for himself than daniel webster, but he was not so good a penman as noah; noah was the better pen-writer.
noah webster also had the better command of language of the two. those who have read his great work entitled "webster's elementary spelling-book, or, how one word led to another," will agree with me that he was smart. noah never lacked for a word by which to express himself.
he was a brainy man and a good speller.
one by one our eminent men are passing away. mr. webster has passed away; napoleon bonaparte is no more; and dr. mary walker is fading away.
this has been a severe winter on red shirt; and i have to guard against the night air a good deal myself.
it would ill become me, at this late date, to criticise mr. webster's work, a work that is now, i may say, in nearly every home and school-room in the land. it is a great book. i only hope that had mr.
webster lived he would have been equally fair in his criticism of my books.
i hate to compare my books with mr. webster's, because it looks egotistical in me; but, although noah's book is larger than mine, and has more literary attractions as a book to set a child on at the table, it does not hold the interest of the reader all the way through.
he has introduced too many characters into his book at the expense of the plot. it is a good book to pick up and while away a leisure hour, perhaps, but it is not a work that could rivet your interest till midnight, while the fire went out and the thermometer stepped down to 47° below zero. you do not hurry through the pages to see whether reginald married the girl or not. mr. webster did not seem to care how the affair turned out.
therein consists the great difference between noah and myself. he doesn't keep up the interest. a friend of mine at sing sing, who secured one of my books, said he never left his room till he had devoured it. he said he seemed chained to the spot; and if you can't believe a convict who is entirely out of politics, whom, in the name of george washington, can you trust?
mr. webster was certainly a most brilliant writer, though a little inclined, perhaps, to be wordy. i have discovered in some of his later books one hundred and eighteen thousand words no two of which are alike.
this shows great fluency and versatility, it is true, but we need something else. the reader waits in vain to be thrilled by the author's wonderful word-painting. there is not a thrill in the whole tome.
i had heard so much of mr. webster that when i read his book i confess i was disappointed. it is cold, methodical, dry, and dispassionate in the extreme, and one cannot help comparing it with the works of james fenimore cooper and horace.
as i said, however, it is a good book to pick up for the purpose of whiling away an idle hour. no one should travel without mr. webster's tale. those who examine this tale will readily see why there were no flies on the author. he kept them off with this tale.
it is a good book, as i say, to take up for a moment, or to read on the train, or to hold the door open on a hot day. i would never take a long railroad ride without it, eyether. i would as soon forget my bottle of cough-medicine.
mr. webster's speller had an immense sale. ten years ago he had sold forty million copies. and yet it had this same defect. it was cold, dull, disconnected, and verbose. there was only one good thing in the book, and that was a little literary gem regarding a boy who broke in and stole the apples of a total stranger. the story was so good that i have often wondered whom mr. webster got to write it for him.
the old man, it seems, at first told the boy that he had better come down, as there was a draught in the tree; but the young sass-box apple-sass-box, i presume told him to avaunt.
at last the old man said, "come down, honey. i am afraid the limb will break if you don't." then, as the boy still remained, he told him that those were not eating-apples, that they were just common cooking-apples, and that there were worms in them. but the boy said he didn't mind a little thing like that. so then the old gentleman got irritated, and called the dog, and threw turf at the boy, and at last saluted him with pieces of turf and decayed cabbages; and after the lad had gone away the old man pried the bull-dog's jaws open and found a mouthful of pantaloons and a freckle.
i do not tell this, of course, in mr. webster's language, but i give the main points as they recur now to my mind.
though i have been a close student of mr. webster for years and have carefully examined his style, i am free to say that his ideas about writing a book are not the same as mine. of course it is a great temptation for a young author to write a book that will have a large sale; but that should not be all. we should have a higher object than that, and strive to interest those who read the book. it should not be jerky and scattering in its statements.
i do not wish to do an injustice to a great man who is now no more, a man who did so much for the world and who could spell the longest word without hesitation, but i speak of these things just as i would expect others to criticise my work. if one aspire to be a member of the literati of his day, he must expect to be criticised. i have been criticised myself. when i was in public life, as a justice of the peace in the rocky mountains, a man came in one day and criticised me so that i did not get over it for two weeks.
i might add, though i dislike to speak of it now, that mr. webster was at one time a member of the legislature of massachusetts. i believe that was the only time he ever stepped aside from the strait and narrow way.
a good many people do not know this, but it is true.
mr. webster was also a married man, yet he never murmured or repined.
chapter xxiv.
befo' the wah causes which led to it masterly grasp of the subject shown by the author.
a man named lopez in 1851 attempted to annex cuba, thus furnishing for our republican wrapper a genuine havana filler; but he failed, and was executed, while his plans were not.
franklin pierce was elected president on the democratic ticket, running against general scott, the whig candidate. slavery began to be discussed again, when stephen a. douglas, in congress, advocated squatter sovereignty, or the right for each territory to decide whether it would be a free or a slave state. the measure became a law in 1854.
that was what made trouble in kansas. the two elements, free and slave, were arrayed against each other, and for several years friends from other states had to come over and help kansas bury its dead. the condition of things for some time was exceedingly mortifying to the citizen who went out to milk after dark without his gun.
trouble with mexico arose, owing to the fact that the government had used a poor and unreliable map in establishing the line: so general gadsden made a settlement for the disputed ground, and we paid mexico ten millions of dollars. it is needless to say that we have since seen the day when we wished that we had it back.
two ports of entry were now opened to us in japan by commodore perry's expedition, and cups and saucers began to be more plentiful in this country, many of the wealthier deciding at that time not to cool tea in the saucer or drink it vociferously from that vessel. this custom and the whig party passed away at the same time.
the republican or anti-slavery party nominated for president john c.
frémont, who received the vote of eleven states, but james buchanan was elected, and proved to the satisfaction of the world that there is nothing to prevent any unemployed man's applying for the presidency of the united states; also that if his life has been free from ideas and opinions he may be elected sometimes where one who has been caught in the very act of thinking, and had it proved on him, might be defeated.
chief justice taney now stated that slaves could be taken into any state of the union by their owners without forfeiting the rights of ownership.
this was called the dred scott decision, and did much to irritate abolitionists like john brown, whose soul as this book goes to press is said to be marching on. brown was a kansas man with a mission and massive whiskers. he would be called now a crank; but his action in seizing a united states arsenal at harper's ferry and declaring the slaves free was regarded by the south as thoroughly representative of the northern feeling.
the country now began to be in a state of restlessness. brown had been captured and hanged as a traitor. northern men were obliged to leave their work every little while to catch a negro, crate him, and return him to his master or give him a lift towards canada; and, as the negro was replenishing the earth at an astonishing rate, general alarm broke out.
douglas was the champion of squatter sovereignty, john c. breckinridge of the doctrine that slaves could be checked through as personal baggage into any state of the union, and lincoln of the anti-slavery principle which afterwards constituted the spinal column of the federal government as opposed to the confederacy of the seceded states.
lincoln was elected, which reminded him of an anecdote. douglas and several other candidates were defeated, which did not remind them of anything.
south carolina seceded in december, 1860, and soon after mississippi, florida, alabama, georgia, louisiana, and texas followed suit.
the following february the confederacy was organized at montgomery, alabama, and jefferson davis was elected president. long and patient effort on the part of the historian to ascertain how he liked it has been entirely barren of results. alexander h. stephens was made vice-president.
everything belonging to the united states and not thoroughly fastened down was carried away by the confederacy, while president buchanan looked the other way or wrote airy persiflage to tottering dynasties which slyly among themselves characterized him as a neat and cleanly old lady.
had buchanan been a married man it is generally believed now that his wife would have prevented the war. then she would have called james out from under the bed and allowed him to come to the table for his meals with the family. but he was not married, and the war came on.
major anderson was afraid to remain at fort moultrie in charleston harbor, so crossed over to fort sumter. the south regarded this as hostility, and the fort was watched to see if any one should attempt to divide his lunch with the garrison, which it was declared would be regarded as an act of defiance. the reader will see by this that a deaf and dumb asylum in northern michigan was about the only safe place for a peaceable man at that time.
president lincoln found himself placed at the head of a looted government on the sharp edge of a crisis that had not been properly upholstered. the buchanan cabinet had left little except a burglar's tool or two here and there to mark its operations, and, with the aged and infirm general scott at the head of a little army, and no encouragement except from the abolitionists, many of whom had never seen a colored man outside of a minstrel performance, the president stole incog. into washington, like a man who had agreed to lecture there.
southern officers resigned daily from the army and navy to go home and join the fortunes of their several states. meantime, the federal government moved about like a baby elephant loaded with shot, while the new confederacy got men, money, arms, and munitions of war from every conceivable point.
finding that supplies were to be sent to major anderson, general peter g. t. beauregard summoned major anderson to surrender. general beauregard, after the war, became one of the good, kind gentlemen who annually stated over their signatures that they had examined the louisiana state lottery and that there was no deception about it. the lottery felt grateful for this, and said that the general should never want while it had a roof of its own.
major anderson had seventy men, while general beauregard had seven thousand. after a bombardment and a general fight of thirty-four hours, the starved and suffocated garrison yielded to overwhelming numbers.
president lincoln was not admired by a class of people in the north and south who heard with horror that he had at one time worked for ten dollars a month. they thought the president's salary too much for him, and feared that he would buy watermelons with it. they also feared that some day he might tell a funny story in the presence of queen victoria.
the snobocracy could hardly sleep nights for fear that lincoln at a state dinner might put sugar and cream in his cold consommé.
jefferson davis, it was said, knew more of etiquette in a minute than lincoln knew all his life.
the capture of sumter united the north and unified the south. it made "war democrats" i.e., democrats who had voted against lincoln join him in the prosecution of the war. more united states property was cheerfully appropriated by the confederacy, which showed that it was alive and kicking from the very first minute it was born.
confederate troops were sent into virginia and threatened the capitol at washington, and would have taken it if the city had not, in summer, been regarded as unhealthful.
the sixth massachusetts regiment, hurrying to the capital, was attacked in baltimore and several men were killed. this was the first actual bloodshed in the civil war which caused rivers and lakes and torrents of the best blood of north and south to cover the fair, sweet clover fields and blue-grass meadows made alone for peace.
the general opinion of the author, thirty-five years afterwards, is that the war was as unavoidable as the deluge, and as idiotic in its incipiency as adam's justly celebrated defence in the great "apple sass case."
men will fight until it is educated out of them, just as they will no doubt retain rudimentary tails and live in trees till they know better.
it's all owing to how a man was brought up.
of course after we have been drawn into the fight and been fined and sent home, we like to maintain that we were fighting for our home, or liberty, or the flag, or something of the kind. we hate to admit that, as a nation, we fought and paid for it afterwards with our family's bread-money just because we were irritated. that's natural; but most great wars are arranged by people who stay at home and sell groceries to the widow and orphan and old maids at one hundred per cent. advance.
arlington heights and alexandria were now seized and occupied by the union troops for the protection of washington, and mosquito-wires were put up in the capitol windows to keep the largest of the rebels from coming in and biting congress.
fort monroe was garrisoned by a force under general benjamin f. butler, and an expedition was sent out against big bethel. on the way the federal troops fired into each other, which pleased the confederates very much indeed. the union troops were repulsed with loss, and went back to the fort, where they stated that they were disappointed in the war.
west virginia was strongly for the union in sentiment, and was set off from the original state of virginia, and, after some fighting the first year of the war over its territory, came into line with the northern states. the fighting here was not severe. generals mcclellan and rosecrans (union) and lee (confederate) were the principal commanders.
the first year of the war was largely spent in sparring for wind, as one very able authority has it.
in the next chapter reference will be made to the battle of bull run, and the odium will be placed where it belongs. the author reluctantly closes this chapter in order to go out and get some odium for that purpose.
chapter xxv.
bull run and other battles.
on the 21st of july, 1861, occurred the battle of bull run, under the joint management of general irwin mcdowell and general p. g. t.
beauregard. after a sharp conflict, the confederates were repulsed, but rallied again under general t. j. jackson, called thereafter stonewall jackson. while the federals were striving to beat jackson back, troops under generals early and kirby smith from manassas junction were hurled against their flank.[5] mcdowell's men retreated, and as they reached the bridge a shell burst among their crowded and chaotic numbers. a caisson was upset, and a panic ensued, many of the troops continuing at a swift canter till they reached the capitol, where they could call on the sergeant-at-arms to preserve order.
as a result of this run on the banks of the potomac, the north suddenly decided that the war might last a week or two longer than at first stated, that the foe could not be killed with cornstalks, and that a mistake had been made in judging that the rebellion wasn't loaded.[6]
half a million men were called for and five hundred million dollars voted. general george b. mcclellan took command of the army of the potomac.
the battle of ball's bluff resulted disastrously to the union forces, and two thousand men were mostly driven into the potomac, some drowned and others shot. colonel baker, united states senator from oregon, was killed.
the war in missouri now opened. captain lyon reserved the united states arsenal at st. louis, and defeated colonel marmaduke at booneville.
general sigel was defeated at carthage, july 5, by the confederates: so lyon, with five thousand men, decided to attack more than twice that number of the enemy under price and mcculloch, which he did, august 10, at wilson's creek. he was killed while making a charge, and his men were defeated.
general frémont then took command, and drove price to springfield, but he was in a short time replaced by general hunter, because his war policy was offensive to the enemy. hunter was soon afterwards removed, and major-general halleck took his place. halleck gave general satisfaction to the enemy, and even his red messages from washington, where he boarded during the war, were filled with nothing but kindness for the misguided foe.
davis early in the war commissioned privateers, and lincoln blockaded the southern ports. the north had but one good vessel at the time, and those who have tried to blockade four or five thousand miles of hostile coast with one vessel know full well what it is to be busy. the entire navy consisted of forty-two ships, and some of these were not seaworthy.
some of them were so pervious that their guns had to be tied on to keep them from leaking through the cracks of the vessel.
hatteras inlet was captured, and commodore dupont, aided by general thomas w. sherman, captured port royal entrance and tybee island. port royal became the dépôt for the fleet.
it was now decided at the south to send messrs. mason and slidell to england, partly for change of scene and rest, and partly to make a friendly call on queen victoria and invite her to come and spend the season at asheville, north carolina. it was also hoped that she would give a few readings from her own works at the south, while her retinue could go to the front and have fun with the yankees, if so disposed.
these gentlemen, wearing their nice new broadcloth clothes, and with a court suit and suitable night-wear to use in case they should be pressed to stop a week or two at the castle, got to havana safely, and took passage on the british ship trent; but captain wilkes, of the united states steamer san jacinto, took them off the trent, just as mr. mason had drawn and fortunately filled a hand with which he hoped to pay a part of the war-debt of the south and get a new overcoat in london.
later, however, the united states disavowed this act of captain wilkes, and said it was only a bit of pleasantry on his part.
the first year of the war had taught both sides a few truths, and especially that the war did not in any essential features resemble a straw-ride to camp-meeting and return. the south had also discovered that the yankee peddlers could not be captured with fly-paper, and that although war was not their regular job they were willing to learn how it was done.
in 1862 the national army numbered five hundred thousand men, and the confederate army three hundred and fifty thousand. three objects were decided upon by the federal government for the union army and navy to accomplish, viz., 1, the opening of the mississippi; 2, the blockade of southern ports; and 3, the capture of richmond, the capital of the southern confederacy.
the capture of forts henry and donelson was undertaken by general grant, aided by commodore foote, and on february 6 a bombardment was opened with great success, reducing fort henry in one hour. the garrison got away because the land-forces had no idea the fort would yield so soon, and therefore could not get up there in time to cut off the retreat.
fort donelson was next attacked, the garrison having been reinforced by the men from fort henry. the fight lasted four days, and on february 16 the fort, with fifteen thousand men, surrendered.
nashville was now easily occupied by buell, and columbus and bowling green were taken. the confederates fell back to corinth, where general beauregard (peter g. t.) and albert sidney johnston massed their forces.
general grant now captured the memphis and charleston railroad; but the confederates decided to capture him before buell, who had been ordered to reinforce him, should effect a junction with him. april 6 and 7, therefore, the battle of shiloh occurred. whether the union troops were surprised or not at this battle, we cannot here pause to discuss.
suffice it to say that one of the federal officers admitted to the author in 1879, while under the influence of koumys, that, though not strictly surprised, he believed he violated no confidence in saying that they were somewhat astonished.
it was sunday morning, and the northern hordes were just considering whether they would take a bite of beans and go to church or remain in camp and get their laundry-work counted for monday, when the confederacy and some other men burst upon them with a fierce, rude yell. in a few moments the federal troops had decided that there had sprung up a strong personal enmity on the part of the south, and that ill feeling had been engendered in some way.
all that beautiful sabbath-day they fought, the federals yielding ground slowly and reluctantly till the bank of the river was reached and grant's artillery commanded the position. here a stand was made until buell came up, and shortly afterwards the confederates fell back; but they had captured the yankee camp entire, and many a boy in blue lost the nice warm woollen pulse-warmers crocheted for him by his soul's idol. it is said that over thirty-five hundred needle-books and three thousand men were captured by the confederates, also thirty flags and immense quantities of stores; but the confederate commander, general a.
s. johnston, was killed. the following morning the tide had turned, and general p. g. t. beauregard retreated unmolested to corinth.
general halleck now took command, and, as the confederates went away from there, he occupied corinth, though still retaining his rooms at the arlington hotel in washington.
the confederates who retreated from columbus fell back to island no. 10 in the mississippi river, where commodore foote bombarded them for three weeks, thus purifying the air and making the enemy feel much better than at any previous time during the campaign. general pope crossed the mississippi, capturing the batteries in the rear of the island, and turning them on the enemy, who surrendered april 7, the day of the battle of shiloh.
may 10, the union gun-boats moved down the river. fort pillow was abandoned by the southern forces, and the confederate flotilla was destroyed in front of memphis. kentucky and tennessee were at last the property of the fierce hordes from the great coarse north.
general bragg was now at chattanooga, price at iuka, and van dorn at holly springs. all these generals had guns, and were at enmity with the united states of america. they very much desired to break the union line of investment extending from memphis almost to chattanooga.
bragg started out for the ohio river, intending to cross it and capture the middle states; but buell heard of it and got there twenty-four hours ahead, wherefore bragg abandoned his plans, as it flashed over him like a clap of thunder from a clear sky that he had no place to put the middle states if he had them. he therefore escaped in the darkness, his wagon-trains sort of drawling over forty miles of road and "hit a-rainin'."
september 19, general price, who, with van dorn, had considered it a good time to attack grant, who had sent many troops north to prevent bragg's capture of north america, decided to retreat, and, general rosecrans failing to cut him off, escaped, and was thus enabled to fight on other occasions.
the two confederate generals now decided to attack the union forces at corinth, which they did. they fought beautifully, especially the texan and missouri troops, who did some heroic work, but they were defeated and driven forty miles with heavy loss.
october 30, general buell was succeeded by general rosecrans.
the battle of murfreesboro occurred december 31 and january 2. it was one of the bloodiest battles of the whole conflict, and must have made the men who brought on the war by act of congress feel first-rate. about one-fourth of those engaged were killed.
an attack on vicksburg, in which grant and sherman were to co-operate, the former moving along the mississippi central railroad and sherman descending the river from memphis, was disastrous, and the capture of arkansas post, january 11, 1863, closed the campaign of 1862 on the father of waters.
general price was driven out of missouri by general curtis, and had to stay in arkansas quite a while, though he preferred a dryer climate.
general van dorn now took command of these forces, numbering twenty thousand men, and at pea ridge, march 7 and 8, 1863, he was defeated to a remarkable degree. during his retreat he could hardly restrain his impatience.
some four or five thousand indians joined the confederates in this battle, but were so astonished at the cannon, and so shocked by the large decayed balls, as they called the shells, which came hurtling through the air, now and then hurting an indian severely, that they went home before the exercises were more than half through. they were down on the programme for some fantastic and interesting tortures of union prisoners, but when they got home to the reservation and had picked the briers out of themselves they said that war was about as barbarous a thing as they were ever to, and they went to bed early, leaving a call for 9.30 a.m. on the following day.
the red brother's style of warfare has an air about it that is unpopular now. a common stone stab-knife is a feeble thing to use against people who shoot a distance of eight miles with a gun that carries a forty-gallon caldron full of red-hot iron.
chapter xxvi.
some more fratricidal strife.
the effort to open the mississippi from the north was seconded by an expedition from the south, in which captain david g. farragut, commanding a fleet of forty vessels, co-operated with general benjamin f. butler, with the capture of new orleans as the object.
mortar-boats covered with green branches for the purpose of fooling the enemy, as no one could tell at any distance at all whether these were or were not olive-branches, steamed up the river and bombarded forts jackson and st. philip till the stunned catfish rose to the surface of the water to inquire, "why all this?" and turned their pallid stomachs toward the soft southern zenith. sixteen thousand eight hundred shells were thrown into the two forts, but that did not capture new orleans.
farragut now decided to run his fleet past the defences, and, desperate as the chances were, he started on april 24. a big cable stretched across the river suggested the idea that there was a hostile feeling among the new orleans people. five rafts and armed steamers met him, and the iron-plated ram manassas extended to him a cordial welcome to a wide wet grave with a southern exposure.
farragut cut through the cable about three o'clock in the morning, practically destroyed the confederate fleet, and steamed up to the city, which was at his mercy.
the forts, now threatened in the rear by butler's army, surrendered, and farragut went up to baton rouge and took possession of it. general butler's occupation at new orleans has been variously commented upon by both friend and foe, but we are only able to learn from this and the entire record of the war, in fact, that it is better to avoid hostilities unless one is ready to accept the unpleasant features of combat. the author, when a boy, learned this after he had acquired the unpleasant features resulting from combat which the artist has cleverly shown on opposite page.
general butler said he found it almost impossible to avoid giving offence to the foe, and finally he gave it up in despair.
the french are said to be the politest people on the face of the earth, but no german will admit it; and though the germans are known to have big, warm, hospitable hearts, since the franco-prussian war you couldn't get a frenchman to admit this.
in february burnside captured roanoke island, and the coast of north carolina fell into the hands of the union army. port royal became the base of operations against florida, and at the close of the year 1862 every city on the atlantic coast except charleston, wilmington, and savannah was held by the union army.
the merrimac iron-clad, which had made much trouble for the union shipping for some time, steamed into hampton roads on the 8th of march.
hampton roads is not the champs-elysées of the south, but a long wet stretch of track east of virginia, the midway plaisance of the salted sea. the merrimac steered for the cumberland, rammed her, and the cumberland sunk like a stove-lid, with all on board. the captain of the congress, warned by the fate of the cumberland, ran his vessel on shore and tried to conceal her behind the tall grass, but the merrimac followed and shelled her till she surrendered.
the merrimac then went back to norfolk, where she boarded, night having come on apace. in the morning she aimed to clear out the balance of the union fleet. that night, however, the monitor, a flat little craft with a revolving tower, invented by captain ericsson, arrived, and in the morning when the merrimac started in on her day's work of devastation, beginning with the minnesota, the insignificant-looking monitor slid up to the iron monster and gave her two one-hundred-and-sixty-six-and-three-quarter-pound solid shot.
the merrimac replied with a style of broadside that generally sunk her adversary, but the balls rolled off the low flat deck and fell with a solemn plunk in the moaning sea, or broke in fragments and lay on the forward deck like the shells of antique eggs on the floor of the house of parliament after a home rule argument.
five times the merrimac tried to ram the little spitz-pup of the navy, but her huge iron beak rode up over the slippery deck of the enemy, and when the big vessel looked over her sides to see its wreck, she discovered that the monitor was right side up and ready for more.
the confederate vessel gave it up at last, and went back to norfolk defeated, her career suddenly closed by the timely genius of the able scandinavian.
the peninsular campaign was principally addressed toward the capture of richmond. one hundred thousand men were massed at fort monroe april 4, and marched slowly toward yorktown, where five thousand confederates under general magruder stopped the great army under mcclellan.
after a month's siege, and just as mcclellan was about to shoot at the town, the garrison took its valise and went away.
on the 5th of may occurred the battle of williamsburg, between the forces under "fighting joe" hooker and general johnston. it lasted nine hours, and ended in the routing of the confederates and their pursuit by hooker to within seven miles of richmond. this caused the adjournment of the confederate congress.
but johnston prevented the junction of mcdowell and mcclellan after the capture of hanover court-house, and stonewall jackson, reinforced by ewell, scared the union forces almost to death. they crossed the potomac, having marched thirty-five miles per day. washington was getting too hot now to hold people who could get away.
it was hard to say which capital had been scared the worst.
the governors of the northern states were asked to send militia to defend the capital, and the front door of the white house was locked every night after ten o'clock.
but finally the union generals, instead of calling for more troops, got after general jackson, and he fled from the shenandoah valley, burning the bridges behind him. it is said that as he and his staff were about to cross their last bridge they saw a mounted gun on the opposite side, manned by a union artilleryman. jackson rode up and in clarion tones called out, "who told you to put that gun there, sir? bring it over here, sir, and mount it, and report at head-quarters this evening, sir!"
the artilleryman unlimbered the gun, and while he was placing it general jackson and staff crossed over and joined the army.
one cannot be too careful, during a war, in the matter of obedience to orders. we should always know as nearly as possible whether our orders come from the proper authority or not.
no one can help admiring this dashing officer's tour in the shenandoah valley, where he kept three major-generals and sixty thousand troops awake nights with fifteen thousand men, saved richmond, scared washington into fits, and prevented the union of mcclellan's and mcdowell's forces. had there been more such men, and a little more confidence in the great volume of typographical errors called confederate money, the lovely character who pens these lines might have had a different tale to tell.
may 31 and june 1 occurred the battle of fair oaks, where mcclellan's men floundering in the mud of the chickahominy swamps were pounced upon by general johnston, who was wounded the first day. on the following day, as a result of this accident, johnston's men were repulsed in disorder.
general robert e. lee, who was now in command of the confederate forces, desired to make his army even more offensive than it had been, and on june 12 general stuart led off with his cavalry, made the entire circuit of the union army, saw how it looked from behind, and returned to richmond, much improved in health, having had several meals of victuals while absent.
hooker now marched to where he could see the dome of the court-house at richmond, but just then mcclellan heard that jackson had been seen in the neighborhood of hanover court-house, and so decided to change his base. general mcclellan was a man of great refinement, and would never use the same base over a week at a time.
he had hardly got the base changed when lee fell upon his flank at mechanicsville, june 26, and the seven days' battle followed. the union troops fought and fell back, fought and fell back, until malvern hill was reached, where, worn with marching, choked with dust, and broken down by the heat, to which they were unaccustomed, they made their last stand, july 1. here lee got such a reception that he did not insist on going any farther.
but the union army was cooped up on the james river. the siege of richmond had been abandoned, and the north felt blue and discouraged.
three hundred thousand more men were called for, and it seemed that, as in the south, "the cradle and the grave were to be robbed" for more troops.
lee now decided to take washington and butcher congress to make a roman holiday. general pope met the confederates august 26, and while lee and jackson were separated could have whipped the latter had the army of the potomac reinforced him as it should, but, full of malaria and foot-sore with marching, it did not reach him in time, and pope had to fight the entire confederate army on that historic ground covered with so many unpleasant memories and other things, called bull run.
for the second time the worn and wilted union army was glad to get back to washington, where the president was, and where beer was only five cents per glass.
oh, how sad everything seemed at that time to the north, and how high cotton cloth was! the bride who hastily married her dear one and bade him good-by as the bugle called him to the war, pointed with pride to her cotton clothes as a mark of wealth; and the middle classes were only too glad to have a little cotton mixed with their woollen clothes.
lee invaded maryland, and mcclellan, restored to command of the army of the potomac, followed him, and found a copy of his order of march, which revealed the fact that only a portion of the army was before him. so, overtaking the confederates at south mountain, he was ready for a victory, but waited one day; and in the mountains lee got his troops united again, while jackson also returned. the union troops had over eighty thousand in their ranks, and nothing could have been more thoughtful or genteel than to wait for the confederates to get as many together as possible, otherwise the battle might have been brief and unsatisfactory to the tax-payer or newspaper subscriber, who of course wants his money's worth when he pays for a battle.
the battle of antietam was a very fierce one, and undecisive, yet it saved washington from an invasion by the confederates, who would have done a good deal of trading there, no doubt, entirely on credit, thus injuring business very much and loading down washington merchants with book accounts, which, added to what they had charged already to members of congress, would have made times in washington extremely dull.
general mcclellan, having impressed the country with the idea that he was a good bridge-builder, but a little too dilatory in the matter of carnage, was succeeded by general burnside.
president lincoln had written the proclamation of emancipation to the slaves in july, but waited for a victory before publishing it. bull run as a victory was not up to his standard; so when lee was driven from maryland the document was issued by which all slaves in the united states became free; and, although thirty-one years have passed at this writing, they are still dropping in occasionally from the back districts to inquire about the truth of the report.
chapter xxvii.
still more fraternal bloodshed, on principle. outing features disappear, and give place to strained relations between combatants, who begin to mix things.
on december 13 the year's business closed with the battle of fredericksburg, under the management of general burnside. twelve thousand union troops were killed before night mercifully shut down upon the slaughter.
the confederates were protected by stone walls and situated upon a commanding height, from which they were able to shoot down the yankees with perfect sang-froid and deliberation.
in the midst of all these discouragements, the red brother fetched loose in minnesota, iowa, and dakota, and massacred seven hundred men, women, and children. the outbreak was under the management of little crow, and was confined to the sioux nation. thirty-nine of these indians were hanged on the same scaffold at mankato, minnesota, as a result of this wholesale murder.
this execution constitutes one of the green spots in the author's memory. in all lives now and then an oasis is liable to fall. this was oasis enough to last the writer for years.
in 1863 the federal army numbered about seven hundred thousand men, and the confederates about three hundred and fifty thousand. still it took two more years to close the war.
it is held now by good judges that the war was prolonged by the jealousy existing between union commanders who wanted to be president or something else, and that it took so much time for the generals to keep their eyes on caucuses and county papers at home that they fought best when surprised and attacked by the foe.
general grant moved again on vicksburg, and on may 1, defeated pemberton at fort gibson. he also prevented a junction between joseph e. johnston and pemberton, and drove the latter into vicksburg, securing the stopper so tightly that after forty-seven days the garrison surrendered, july 4.
this fight cost the confederates thirty-seven thousand prisoners, ten thousand killed and wounded, and immense quantities of stores. it was a warm time in vicksburg; a curious man who stuck his hat out for twenty seconds above the ramparts found fifteen bullet-holes in it when he took it down, and when he wore it to church he attracted more attention than the collection.
the north now began to sit up and take notice. morning papers began to sell once more, and grant was the name on every tongue.
the mississippi was open to the gulf, and the confederacy was practically surrounded.
rosecrans would have moved on the enemy, but learned that the foe had several head of cavalry more than he did, also a team of artillery. at this time john morgan made a raid into ohio. he surrounded cincinnati, but did not take it, as he was not keeping house at the time and hated to pay storage on it. he got to parkersburg, west virginia, and was captured there with almost his entire force.
on september 19 and 20 occurred the battle of chickamauga. longstreet rushed into a breach in the union line and swept it with a great big besom of wrath with which he had wisely provided himself on starting out. rosecrans felt mortified when he came to himself and found that his horse had been so unmanageable that he had carried him ten miles from the carnage.
but the left, under thomas, held fast its position, and no doubt saved the little band of sixty thousand men which rosecrans commanded at the time.
his army now found itself shut up in intrenchments, with bragg on the hills threatening the union forces with starvation.
on november 24-25 a battle near chattanooga took place, with grant at the head of the federal forces. hooker came to join him from the army of the potomac, and sherman hurried to his standard from iuka. thomas made a dash and captured orchard knob, and hooker, on the following day, charged lookout mountain.
this was the most brilliant, perhaps, of grant's victories. it is known as the "battle of missionary ridge." hooker had exceeded his prerogative and kept on after capturing the crest of lookout mountain, while sherman was giving the foe several varieties of fits, from the north, when grant discovered that before him the line was being weakened in order to help the confederate flanks. so with thomas he crossed through the first line and over the rifle-pits, forgot that he had intended to halt and reform, and concluded to wait and reform after the war was over, when he should have more time, and that night along the entire line of heights the camp-fires of the union army winked at one another in ghoulish glee.
the army under bragg was routed, and bragg resigned his command.
burnside, who had been relieved of the command of the army of the potomac, was sent to east tennessee, where the brave but frost-bitten troops of longstreet shut him up at knoxville and compelled him to board at the railroad eating-house there.
sherman's worn and weary boys were now ordered at once to the relief of burnside, and longstreet, getting word of it, made a furious assault on the former, who repulsed him with loss, and he went away from there as sherman approached from the west.
hooker had succeeded burnside in the command of the army of the potomac, and he judged that, as lee was now left with but sixty thousand men, while the army of the potomac contained one hundred thousand who craved out-of-door exercise, he might do well to go and get lee, returning in the cool of the evening. lee, however, accomplished the division of his army while concealed in the woods and sent jackson to fall on hooker's rear. the close of the fight found hooker on his old camping-ground opposite fredericksburg, murmuring to himself, in a dazed sort of way, "where am i?" lee felt so good over this that he decided to go north and get something to eat. he also decided to get catalogues and price-lists of philadelphia and new york while there. threatening baltimore in order to mislead general meade, who was now in command of the federals, lee struck into pennsylvania and met with the union cavalry a little west of gettysburg on the chambersburg road. it is said that gettysburg was not intended by either army as the site for the battle, lee hoping to avoid a fight, depending as he did on the well-known hospitality of the pennsylvanians, and meade intending to have the fight at pipe creek, where he had some property.
july 1-2-3 were the dates of this memorable battle. the first day was rather favorable to lee, quite a number of yankee prisoners being taken while they were lost in the crowded streets of gettysburg.
the second day was opened by longstreet, who charged the union left, and ran across sickles, who had by mistake formed in the way of meade's intended line of battle. they outflanked him, but, as they swung around him, warren met them with a diabolical welcome, which stayed them.
sickles found himself on cemetery ridge, while the confederates under ewell were on culp's hill.
on the third day, at one p.m., lee opened with one hundred and fifty guns on cemetery ridge. the air was a hornet's nest of screaming shells with fiery tails. as it lulled a little, out of the woods came eighteen thousand men in battle-array extending over a mile in length. the yankees knew a good thing when they saw it, and they paused to admire this beautiful gathering of foemen in whose veins there flowed the same blood as in their own, and whose ancestors had stood shoulder to shoulder with their own in a hundred battles for freedom.
their sentiment gave place to shouts of battle, and into the silent phalanx a hundred guns poured their red-hot messages of death. the golden grain was drenched with the blood of men no less brave because they were not victorious, and the rich fields of pennsylvania drank with thirsty eagerness the warm blood of many a southern son.
yet they moved onward. volley after volley of musketry mowed them down, and the puny reaper in the neglected grain gave place to the grim reaper death, all down that unwavering line of gray and brown.
they marched up to the union breastworks, bayoneted the gunners at their work, planted their flags on the parapets, and, while the federals converged from every point to this, exploding powder burned the faces of these contending hosts, who, hand to hand, fought each other to death, while far-away widows and orphans multiplied to mourn through the coming years over this ghastly folly of civil war.
whole companies of the confederates rushed as prisoners into the arms of their enemies, and the shattered remnant of the battered foe retreated from the field.
while all this was going on in pennsylvania, pemberton was arranging terms of surrender at vicksburg, and from this date onward the confederacy began to wobble in its orbit, and the president of this ill-advised but bitterly punished scheme began to wish that he had been in canada when the war broke out.
in april of the same year admiral dupont, an able seaman with massive whiskers, decided to run the fortifications at charleston with iron-clads, but the charleston people thought they could run them themselves. so they drove him back after the sinking of the kennebec and the serious injury of all the other vessels.
general gillmore then landed with troops. fort wagner was captured. the 54th regiment of colored troops, the finest organized in the free states, took a prominent part and fought with great coolness and bravery. by december there were fifty thousand colored troops enlisted, and before the war closed over two hundred thousand.
it is needless to say that this made the yankee unpopular at the time in the best society of the south.
general gillmore attempted to capture sumter, and did reduce it to a pulp, but when he went to gather it he was met by a garrison still concealed in the basement, and peppered with volleys of hot shingle-nails and other bric-à-brac, which forced him to retire with loss.
he said afterward that fort sumter was not desirable anyhow.
this closed the most memorable year of the war, with the price of living at the south running up to eight hundred and nine hundred dollars per day, and currency depreciating so rapidly that one's salary had to be advanced every morning in order to keep pace with the price of mule-steaks.
chapter xxviii.
last year of the disagreeable war.
general grant was now in command of all the union troops, and in 1864-5 the plan of operation was to prevent the junction of the confederates, general grant seeking to interest the army in virginia under general lee, and general sherman the army of general joseph e.
johnston in georgia.
sherman started at once, and came upon johnston located on almost impregnable hills all the way to atlanta. the battles of dalton, resaca, dallas, lost mountain, and kenesaw mountain preceded johnston's retreat to the intrenchments of atlanta, july 10, sherman having been on the move since early in may, 1864.
jefferson davis, disgusted with johnston, placed hood in command, who made three heroic attacks upon the union troops, but was repulsed.
sherman now gathered fifteen days' rations from the neighbors, and, throwing his forces across hood's line of supplies, compelled him to evacuate the city.
the historian says that sherman was entirely supplied from nashville via railroad during this trip, but the author knows of his own personal knowledge that there were times when he got his fresh provisions along the road.
this expedition cost the union army thirty thousand men and the confederates thirty-five thousand. besides, georgia was the confederacy, so far as arms, grain, etc., were concerned. sherman attributed much of his success to the fact that he could repair and operate the railroad so rapidly. among his men were yankee machinists and engineers, who were as necessary as courageous fighters.
"we are held here during many priceless hours," said the general, "because the enemy has spoiled this passenger engine. who knows any thing about repairing an engine?"
"i do," said a dusty tramp in blue. "i can repair this one in an hour."
"what makes you think so?"
"well, i made it."
this was one of the strong features of sherman's army. among the hundred thousand who composed it there were so many active brains and skilled hands that the toot of the engine caught the heels of the last echoing shout of the battle.
learning that hood proposed to invade tennessee, sherman prepared to march across georgia to the sea, and if necessary to tramp through the atlantic states.
hood was sorry afterwards that he invaded tennessee. he shut thomas up in nashville after a battle with schofield, and kept the former in-doors for two weeks, when all of a sudden thomas exclaimed, "air! air! give me air!" and came out, throwing hood into headlong flight, when the union cavalry fell on his rear, followed by the infantry, and the forty thousand confederates became a scattered and discouraged mob spread out over several counties.
the burning of atlanta preceded sherman's march, and, though one of the saddest features of the war, was believed to be a military necessity.
those who declare war hoping to have a summer's outing thereby may live to regret it for many bitter years.
on november 16, sherman started, his army moving in four columns, constituting altogether a column of fire by night, and a pillar of cloud and dust by day. kilpatrick's cavalry scoured the country like a mass meeting of ubiquitous little black tennessee hornets.
in five weeks sherman had marched three hundred miles, had destroyed two railroads, had stormed fort mcallister, and had captured savannah.
on the 5th and 6th of may, 1864, occurred the battle of the wilderness, near the old battleground of chancellorsville. no one could describe it, for it was fought in the dense woods, and the two days of useless butchery with not the slightest signs of civilized warfare sickened both armies, and, with no victory for either, they retired to their intrenchments.
grant, instead of retreating, however, quietly passed the flank of the confederates and started for spottsylvania court-house, where a battle occurred may 8-12.
here the two armies fought five days without any advantage to either. it was at this time that grant sent his celebrated despatch stating that he "proposed to fight it out on this line if it took all summer."
finally he sought to turn lee's right flank. june 8, the battle of cold harbor followed this movement. the union forces were shot down in the mire and brush by lee's troops, now snugly in out of the wet, behind the cold harbor defences. one historian says that in twenty minutes ten thousand yankee troops were killed; though badeau, whose accuracy in counting dead has always been perfectly marvellous, admits only seven thousand in all.
grant now turned his attention towards petersburg, but lee was there before him and intrenched, so the union army had to intrench. this only postponed the evil day, however.
things now shaped themselves into a siege of richmond, with petersburg as the first outpost of the besieged capital.
on the 30th of july, eight thousand pounds of powder were carefully inserted under a confederate fort and the entire thing hoisted in the air, leaving a huge hole, in which, a few hours afterwards, many a boy in blue met his death, for in the assault which followed the explosion the union soldiers were mowed down by the concentrated fire of the confederates. the federals threw away four thousand lives here.
on the 18th of august the weldon railroad was captured, which was a great advantage to grant, and, though several efforts were made to recapture it, they were unsuccessful.
general early was delegated to threaten washington and scare the able officers of the army who were stopping there at that time talking politics and abusing grant. he defeated general wallace at monocacy river, and appeared before fort stevens, one of the defences of washington, july 11. had he whooped right along instead of pausing a day somewhere to get laundry-work done before entering washington, he would easily have captured the city.
reinforcements, however, got there ahead of him, and he had to go back.
he sent a force of cavalry into pennsylvania, where they captured chambersburg and burned it on failure of the town trustees to pay five hundred thousand dollars ransom.
general sheridan was placed in charge of the troops here, and defeated early at winchester, riding twenty miles in twenty minutes, as per poem.
at fisher's hill he was also victorious. he devastated the valley of the shenandoah to such a degree that a crow passing the entire length of the valley had to carry his dinner with him.
it was, however, at the battle of cedar creek that sheridan was twenty miles away, according to historical prose. why he was twenty miles away, various and conflicting reasons are given, but on his good horse rienzi he arrived in time to turn defeat and rout into victory and hilarity.
rienzi, after the war, died in eleven states. he was a black horse, with a saddle-gall and a flashing eye.
he passed away at his home in chicago at last in poverty while waiting for a pension applied for on the grounds of founder and lampers brought on by eating too heartily after the battle and while warm, but in the line of duty.
the red river campaign under general banks was a joint naval and land expedition, resulting in the capture of fort de russy, march 14, after which, april 8, the troops marching towards shreveport in very open order, single file or holding one another's hands and singing "john brown's body," were attacked by general dick taylor, and if washington had not been so far away and through a hostile country, bull run would have had another rival. but the boys rallied, and next day repulsed the confederates, after which they returned to new orleans, where board was more reasonable. general banks obtained quite a relief at this time: he was relieved of his command.
august 5, commodore farragut captured mobile, after a neat and attractive naval fight, and on the 24th and 25th of december commodore porter and general butler started out to take fort fisher. after two days' bombardment, butler decided that there were other forts to be had on better terms, and returned. afterwards general terry commanded the second expedition, porter having remained on hand with his vessels to assist. january 15, 1865, the most heroic fighting on both sides resulted, and at last, completely hemmed in, the brave and battered garrison surrendered; but no one who was there need blush to say so, even to-day.
at the south at this time coffee was fifty dollars a pound and gloves were one hundred and fifty dollars a pair. flour was forty dollars a barrel; but you could get a barrel of currency for less than that.
money was plenty, but what was needed seemed to be confidence. running the blockade was not profitable at that time, since over fifteen hundred head of confederate vessels were captured during the war.
the capture of fort fisher closed the last port of the south, and left the confederacy no show with foreign powers or markets.
the alabama was an armed steam-ship, and the most unpleasant feature of the war to the federal government, especially as she had more sympathy and aid in england than was asked for or expected by the unionists.
however, england has since repaid all this loss in various ways. she has put from five to eight million dollars into cattle on the plains of the northwest, where the skeletons of same may be found bleaching in the summer sun; and i am personally acquainted with six americans now visiting england who can borrow enough in a year to make up all the losses sustained through the alabama and other neutral vessels.
captain semmes commanded the alabama, and off cherbourg he sent a challenge to the kearsarge, commanded by captain winslow, who accepted it, and so worked his vessel that the alabama had to move round him in a circle, while he filled her up with iron, lead, copper, tin, german silver, glass, nails, putty, paint, varnishes, and dye-stuff. at the seventh rotation the alabama ran up the white flag and sunk with a low mellow plunk. the crew was rescued by captain winslow and the english yacht deerhound, the latter taking semmes and starting for england.
this matter, however, was settled in after-years.
the care of the sick, the dying, and the dead in the union armies was almost entirely under the eye of the merciful and charitable, loyal and loving members of the sanitary and christian commissions, whose work and its memory kept green in the hearts of the survivors and their children will be monument enough for the coming centuries.
in july, 1864, the debt of the country was two billion dollars and twenty cents. two dollars and ninety cents in greenbacks would buy a reluctant gold dollar.
still, abraham lincoln was re-elected against george b. mcclellan, the democratic candidate, who carried only three states. this was endorsement enough for the policy of president lincoln.
sherman's army of sixty thousand, after a month's rest at savannah, started north to unite with grant in the final blow. "before it was terror, behind it ashes."
columbia was captured february 17, and burned, without sherman's authority, the night following. charleston was evacuated the next day.
johnston was recalled to take command, and opposed the march of sherman, but was driven back after fierce engagements at bentonville and averysboro. on march 25 lee decided to attack grant, and, while the latter was busy, get out of richmond and join johnston, but when this battle, known as the attack on fort steadman, was over, grant's hold was tighter than ever.
sheridan attacked lee's rear with a heavy force, and at five forks, april 1, the surprised garrison was defeated with five thousand captured. the next day the entire union army advanced, and the line of confederate intrenchments was broken. on the following day petersburg and richmond were evacuated, but mr. davis was not there. he had gone away. rather than meet general grant and entertain him when there was no pie in the house, he and the treasury had escaped from the haunts of man, wishing to commune with nature for a while. he was captured at irwinsville, georgia, under peculiar and rather amusing circumstances.
he was never punished, with the exception perhaps that he published a book and did not realize anything from it.
lee fled to the westward, but was pursued by the triumphant federals, especially by sheridan, whose cavalry hung on his flanks day and night.
food failed the fleeing foe, and the young shoots of trees for food and the larger shoots of the artillery between meals were too much for that proud army, once so strong and confident.
let us not dwell on the particulars.
as sheridan planted his cavalry squarely across lee's path of retreat, the worn but heroic tatters of a proud army prepared to sell themselves for a bloody ransom and go down fighting, but grant had demanded their surrender, and, seeing back of the galling, skirmishing cavalry solid walls of confident infantry, the terms of surrender were accepted by general lee, and april 9 the confederate army stacked its arms near appomattox court-house.
the confederate war debt was never paid, for some reason or other, but the federal debt when it was feeling the best amounted to two billion eight hundred and forty-four million dollars. one million men lost their lives.
was it worth while?
in the midst of the general rejoicing, president lincoln was assassinated by john wilkes booth at ford's theatre, april 14. the assassin was captured in a dying condition in a burning barn, through a crack in the boarding of which he had been shot by a soldier named boston corbett. he died with no sympathetic applause to soothe the dull, cold ear of death.
west virginia was admitted to the union in 1863, and nevada in 1864.
the following chapters will be devoted to more peaceful details, while we cheerfully close the sorrowful pages in which we have confessed that, with all our greatness as a nation, we could not stay the tide of war.
chapter xxix.
too much liberty in places and not enough elsewhere. thoughts on the late war who is the bigger ass, the man who will not forgive and forget, or the mawkish and moist-eyed sniveller who wants to do that all the time?
when patrick henry put his old cast-iron spectacles on the top of his head and whooped for liberty, he did not know that some day we should have more of it than we knew what to do with. he little dreamed that the time would come when we should have more liberty than we could pay for.
when mr. henry sawed the air and shouted for liberty or death, i do not believe that he knew the time would come when liberty would stand on bedloe's island and yearn for rest and change of scene.
it seems to me that we have too much liberty in this country in some ways. we have more liberty than we have money. we guarantee that every man in america shall fill himself up full of liberty at our expense, and the less of an american he is the more liberty he can have. should he desire to enjoy himself, all he needs is a slight foreign accent and a willingness to mix up with politics as soon as he can get his baggage off the steamer. the more i study american institutions the more i regret that i was not born a foreigner, so that i could have something to say about the management of our great land. if i could not be a foreigner, i believe i should prefer to be a policeman or an indian not taxed.
i am often led to ask, in the language of the poet, "is civilization a failure, and is the caucasian played out?"
almost every one can have a good deal of fun in america except the american. he seems to be so busy paying his taxes that he has very little time to vote, or to mingle in society's giddy whirl, or to mix up with the nobility. that is the reason why the alien who rides across the united states in the "limited mail" and writes a book about us before breakfast wonders why we are always in a hurry. that also is the reason why we have to throw our meals into ourselves with such despatch, and hardly have time to maintain a warm personal friendship with our families.
we do not care much for wealth, but we must have freedom, and freedom costs money. we have advertised to furnish a bunch of freedom to every man, woman, and child who comes to our shores, and we are going to deliver the goods whether we have any left for ourselves or not.
what would the great world beyond the seas say to us if some day the blue-eyed oriental, with his heart full of love for our female seminaries and our old women's homes, should land upon our coasts and crave freedom in car-load lots but find that we were using all the liberty ourselves? but what do we want of liberty, anyhow? what could we do with it if we had it? it takes a man of leisure to enjoy liberty, and we have no leisure whatever. it is a good thing to keep in the house for the use of guests, but we don't need it for ourselves.
therefore we have a statue of liberty enlightening the world, because it shows that we keep liberty on tap winter and summer. we want the whole broad world to remember that when it gets tired of oppression it can come here to america and oppress us. we are used to it, and we rather like it. if we don't like it, we can get on the steamer and go abroad, where we may visit the effete monarchies and have a high old time.
the sight of the goddess of liberty standing there in new york harbor night and day, bathing her feet in the rippling sea, is a good thing. it is first-rate. it may also be productive of good in a direction that many have not thought of. as she stands there day after day, bathing her feet in the broad atlantic, perhaps some moss-grown alien landing on our shore and moving toward the far west may fix the bright picture in his so-called mind, and, remembering how, on his arrival in new york, he saw liberty bathing her feet with impunity, he may be led in after-years to try it on himself.
more citizens and less voters will some day be adopted as the motto of the republic.
one reference to the late war, and i will close. i want to refer especially to the chronic reconciler who when war was declared was not involved in it, but who now improves every opportunity, especially near election-time, to get out a tired olive-branch and make a tableau of himself. he is worse than the man who cannot forgive or forget.
the growth of reconciliation between the north and the south is the slow growth of years, and the work of generations. when any man, north or south, in a public place takes occasion to talk in a mellow and mawkish way of the great love he now has for his old enemy, watch him. he is getting ready to ask a favor. there is a beautiful, poetic idea in the reunion of two contending and shattered elements of a great nation.
there is something beautifully pathetic in the picture of the north and the south clasped in each other's arms and shedding a torrent of hot tears down each other's backs as it is done in a play, but do you believe that the aged mothers on either side have learned to love the foe with much violence yet? do you believe that the crippled veteran, north or south, now passionately loves the adversary who robbed him of his glorious youth, made him a feeble ruin, and mowed down his comrades with swift death? do you believe that either warrior is so fickle that he has entirely deserted the cause for which he fought? even the victor cannot ask that.
"let the gentle finger of time undo, so far as may be, the devastation wrought by the war, and let succeeding generations seek through natural methods to reunite the business and the traffic that were interrupted by the war. let the south guarantee to the northern investor security to himself and his investment, and he will not ask for the love which we read of in speeches but do not expect and do not find in the south.
"two warring parents on the verge of divorce have been saved the disgrace of separation and agreed to maintain their household for the sake of their children. their love has been questioned by the world, and their relations strained. is it not bad taste for them to pose in public and make a cheap romeo and juliet tableau of themselves?
"let time and merciful silence obliterate the scars of war, and succeeding generations, fostered by the smiles of national prosperity, soften the bitterness of the past and mellow the memory of a mighty struggle in which each contending host called upon almighty god to sustain the cause which it honestly believed to be just."
let us be contented during this generation with the assurance that geographically the union has been preserved, and that each contending warrior has once more taken up the peaceful struggle for bettering and beautifying the home so bravely fought for.
chapter xxx.
reconstruction without pain administrations of johnson and grant.
it was feared that the return of a million federal soldiers to their homes after the four years of war would make serious trouble in the north, but they were very shortly adjusted to their new lives and attending to the duties which peace imposed upon them.
the war of the rebellion was disastrous to nearly every branch of trade, but those who remained at home to write the war-songs of the north did well. some of these efforts were worthy, and, buoyed up by a general feeling of robust patriotism, they floated on to success; but few have stood the test of years and monotonous peace. the author of "mother, i am hollow to the ground" is just depositing his profits from its sale in the picture given on next page. the second one, wearing the cape-overcoat tragedy air, wrote "who will be my laundress now?"
andrew johnson succeeded to mr. lincoln's seat, having acted before as his vice.
a great review of the army, lasting twelve hours, was arranged to take place in washington, consisting of the armies of grant and sherman. it was reviewed by the president and cabinet; it extended over thirty miles twenty men deep, and constituted about one-fifth of the northern army at the time peace was declared.
president johnson recognized the state governments existing in virginia, tennessee, arkansas, and louisiana, but instituted provisional governments for the other states of the defeated confederacy, as it seemed impossible otherwise to bring order out of the chaos which war and financial distress had brought about. he authorized the assembly also of loyal conventions to elect state and other officers, and pardoned by proclamation everybody, with the exception of a certain class of the late insurgents whom he pardoned personally.
on christmas day, 1868, a universal amnesty was declared. the thirteenth amendment, abolishing slavery, became a part of the constitution, december 18, 1865, and the former masters found themselves still morally responsible for these colored people, without the right to control them or even the money with which to employ them.
the annual interest on the national debt at this time amounted to one hundred and fifty million dollars. yet the treasury paid this, together with the expenses of government, and reduced the debt seventy-one million dollars before the volunteer army had been fully discharged in 1866.
comment on such recuperative power as that is unnecessary; for the generation that fights a four-years war costing over two billions of dollars generally leaves the debt for another generation or another century to pay.
congress met finally, ignored the president's rollicking welcome to the seceded states, and over his veto proceeded to pass various laws regarding their admission, such as the civil rights and freedman's bureau bills.
tennessee returned promptly to the union under the constitutional amendments, but the others did not till the nightmare of reconstruction had been added to the horrors of war. in 1868, after much time worse than wasted in carpet-bag government and a mob reign in the south which imperilled her welfare for many years after it was over, by frightening investors and settlers long after peace had been restored, representatives began to come into congress under the laws.
during this same year the hostilities between congress and the president culminated in an effort to impeach the latter. he escaped by one vote.
it is very likely that the assassination of lincoln was the most unfortunate thing that happened to the southern states. while he was not a warrior, he was a statesman, and no gentler hand or more willing brain could have entered with enthusiasm into the adjustment of chaotic conditions, than his.
the fourteenth amendment, a bright little bon mot, became a law june 28, 1868, and was written in the minutes of congress, so that people could go there and refresh their memories regarding it. it guaranteed civil rights to all, regardless of race, color, odor, wildness or wooliness whatsoever, and allows all noses to be counted in congressional representations, no matter what angle they may be at or what the color may be.
some american citizens murmur at taxation without representation, but the negro murmurs at representation without remuneration.
the fenian excitement of 1866 died out without much loss of life.
in october, 1867, alaska was purchased from russia for seven million two hundred thousand dollars. the ice-crop since then would more than pay for the place, and it has also a water-power and cranberry marsh on it.
the rule of the imperialists in france prompted the appointment of maximilian, archduke of austria, as emperor of mexico, supported by the french army. the americans, still sore and in debt at the heels of their own war, pitied the helpless mexicans, and, acting on the principles enunciated in the monroe doctrine, demanded the recall of maximilian, who, deserted finally by his foreign abettors, was defeated and as a prisoner shot by the mexicans, june 19, 1867.
the atlantic cable was laid from valentia bay in ireland to heart's content, newfoundland, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-four miles, and the line from new york to the latter place built in 1856, a distance of one thousand miles, making in all, as keen mathematicians will see, two thousand eight hundred and sixty-four miles.
a very agreeable commercial treaty with china was arranged in 1868.
grant and colfax, republicans, succeeded andrew johnson in the next election, horatio seymour, of new york, and frank p. blair, of missouri, being the democratic nominees. virginia and mississippi had not been fully reconstructed, and so were not yet permitted to vote.
they have squared the matter up since, however, by voting with great enthusiasm.
in 1869 the pacific railroad was completed, whereby the trip from the atlantic to the pacific three thousand and three hundred miles might be made in a week. it also attracted the asiatic trade, and tea, silk, spices, and leprosy found a new market in the land of the free and the home of the brave.
still flushed with its success in humorous legislation, congress, on the 30th of march, 1870, passed the fifteenth amendment, giving to the colored men the right to vote. it then became a part of the constitution, and people who have seen it there speak very highly of it.
prosperity now attracted no attention whatever. gold, worth nearly three dollars at the close of the war, fell to a dollar and ten cents, and the debt during the first two years of this administration was reduced two hundred million dollars.
genuine peace reigned in the entire republic, and o'er the scarred and shell-torn fields of the south there waved, in place of hostile banners, once more the cotton and the corn. the red foliage of the gum-tree with the white in the snowy white cotton-fields and the blue-grass of kentucky (blue-grass is not, strictly speaking, blue enough to figure in the national colors, but the author has taken out a poetic license which does not expire for over a year yet, and he therefore under its permission is allowed a certain amount of idiocy) showed that the fields had never forgotten their loyalty to the national colors. peace under greatly changed conditions resumed her vocations, and, in the language of the poet,
"there were domes of white blossoms where swelled the white tent; there were ploughs in the track where the war-wagons went; there were songs where they lifted up rachel's lament."
october 8, 1871, occurred the great fire in chicago, raging for forty-eight hours and devastating three thousand acres of the city.
twenty-five thousand buildings were burned, and two hundred million dollars' worth of property. one hundred thousand people lost their houses, and over seven and one-half millions of dollars were raised for those who needed it, all parts of the world uniting to improve the joyful opportunity to do good, without a doubt of its hearty appreciation.
boston also had a seventy-million dollar fire in the heart of the wholesale trade, covering sixty acres; and in the prairie and woods fires of wisconsin, minnesota, and michigan, many people lost not only their homes but their lives. fifteen hundred people perished in wisconsin alone.
in 1871 the damage done by the alabama, a british-built ship, and several other cruisers sent out partly to facilitate the cotton trade and partly to do a little fighting when a federal vessel came that way, was assessed at fifteen million five hundred thousand dollars against great britain by the arbitrators who met at geneva, switzerland, and the northwestern boundary line between the united states and british america was settled by arbitration, the emperor of germany acting as arbitrator and deciding in favor of america.
this showed that people who have just wound up a big war have often learned some valuable sense; not two billion dollars' worth, perhaps, but some.
san domingo was reported for sale, and a committee looked at it, priced it, etc., but congress decided not to buy it.
the liberal republican party, or that element of the original party which was opposed to the administration, nominated horace greeley, of new york, while the old party renominated general grant for the term to succeed himself. the latter was elected, and mr. greeley did not long survive his defeat.
the modoc indians broke loose in the early part of grant's second term, and, leaping from their lava-beds early in the morning, shacknasty jim and other unlaundried children of the forest raised merry future punishment, and the government, always kind, always loving and sweet toward the red brother, sent a peace commission with popcorn balls and a gentle-voiced parson to tell shacknasty james and old stand-up-and-sit-down that the white father at washington loved them and wanted them all to come and spend the summer at his house, and also that by sin death came into the world, and that we were all primordial germs at first, and that we should look up, not down, look out, not in, look forward, not backward, and lend a hand.
it was at this moment that early-to-bed-and early-to-rise-black hawk and shacknasty james, thinking that this thing had gone far enough, killed general canby and wounded both mr. meacham and rev. dr. thomas, who had never had an unkind thought toward the modocs in their lives.
the troops then allowed their ill temper to get the best of them, and asked the modocs if they meant anything personal by their action, and, learning that they did, the soldiers did what with the proper authority they would have done at first, bombarded the children of the forest and mussed up their lava-beds so that they were glad to surrender.
in 1873 a panic occurred after the failure of jay cooke & co., of philadelphia, and a money stringency followed, the democrats attributing it a good deal to the party in power, just as cheap republicans twenty years later charged the democratic administration with this same thing.
inconsistency of this kind keeps good men, like the writer, out of politics, and turns their attention toward the contemplation of a better land.
in 1875 centennial anniversaries began to ripen and continued to fall off the different branches of government, according to the history of events so graphically set forth in the preceding pages. they were duly celebrated by a happy and self-made people. the centennial exposition at philadelphia in 1876 was a marked success in every way, nearly ten millions of people having visited it, who claimed that it was well worth the price of admission.
aside from the fact that these ten millions of people had talked about it to millions of folks at home, or thought they had, the exposition was a boon to every one, and thousands of americans went home with a knowledge of their country that they had never had before, and pointers on blowing out gas which saved many lives in after-years.
chapter xxxi.
closing chronicles.
in 1876 the peaceful sioux took an outing, having refused to go to their reservation in accordance with the treaty made with the great father at washington, d. c., and regular troops were sent against them.
general custer, with the 7th regiment, led the advance, and general terry aimed for the rear of the children of the forest up the big horn.
here, on the 25th of june, without assistance, and with characteristic courage, general custer attacked the enemy, sending colonel reno to fall on the rear of the village.
scarcely enough of custer's own command with him at the time lived long enough to tell the story of the battle. general custer, his two brothers, and his nephew were among the dead. reno held his ground until reinforced, but custer's troops were exterminated.
it is said that the sioux rose from the ground like bunch-grass and swarmed up the little hill like a pest of grasshoppers, mowing down the soldiers with the very newest and best weapons of warfare, and leaving nothing at last but the robbed and mutilated bodies lying naked in the desolate land of the dakotah.
the fenimore cooper indian is no doubt a brave and highly intellectual person, educated abroad, refined and cultivated by foreign travel, graceful in the grub dance or scalp walk-around, yet tender-hearted as a girl, walking by night fifty-seven miles in a single evening to warn his white friends of danger. the indian introduced into literature was a bronze apollo who bathed almost constantly and only killed white people who were unpleasant and coarse. he dressed in new and fresh buckskins, with trimming of same, and his sable hair hung glossy and beautiful down the coppery billows of muscles on his back.
the real indian has the dead and unkempt hair of a busted buggy-cushion filled with hen feathers. he lies, he steals, he assassinates, he mutilates, he tortures. he needs persian powder long before he needs the theology which abler men cannot agree upon. we can, in fact, only retain him as we do the buffalo, so long as he complies with the statutes. but the red brother is on his way to join the cave-bear, the three-toed horse, and the ichthyosaurus in the great fossil realm of the historic past. move on, maroon brother, move on!
rutherford b. hayes and william a. wheeler were nominated in the summer of 1876, and so close was the fight against samuel j. tilden and thomas a. hendricks that friends of the latter to this day refer to the selection of hayes and wheeler by a joint electoral commission to whom the contested election was referred, as a fraud and larceny on the part of the republican party. it is not the part of an historian, who is absolutely destitute of political principles, to pass judgment. facts have crept into this history, it is true, but no one could regret it more than the author; yet there has been no bias or political prejudice shown, other than that reflected from the historical sources whence information was necessarily obtained.
hayes was chosen, and gave the country an unruffled, unbiased administration, devoid of frills, and absolutely free from the appearance of hostility to any one. he was one of the most conciliatory presidents ever elected by republican votes or counted in by a joint electoral commission.
he withdrew all troops from the south, and in several southern states things wore a democratic air at once.
in 1873 congress demonetized silver, and quite a number of business-men were demonetized at the same time; so in 1878 silver was made a legal tender for all debts. as a result, in 1879 gold for the first time in seventeen years sold at par.
troubles arose in 1878 over the right to fish in the northeast waters, and the treaty at washington resulted in an award to great britain of five million five hundred thousand dollars, with the understanding that wasteful fishing should cease, and that as soon as either party got enough for a mess he should go home, no matter how well the fish seemed to be biting.
the right to regulate chinese immigration was given by treaty at pekin, and ever since the chinaman has entered our enclosures in some mysterious way, made enough in a few years to live like a potentate in china, and returned, leaving behind a pleasant memory and a chiffonnier here and there throughout the country filled with scorched shirt-bosoms, acid-eaten collars, and white vests with burglar-proof, ingrowing pockets in them.
the next nominations for president and vice-president were james a.
garfield, of ohio, and chester a. arthur, of new york, on the republican ticket, and winfield s. hancock, of pennsylvania, and william h.
english, of indiana, on the democratic ticket. james b. weaver was connected with this campaign also. who will tell us what he had to do with it? can no one tell us what james b. weaver had to do with the campaign of 1881? very well; i will tell you what he had to do with the campaign of 1881.
he was the presidential candidate on the greenback ticket, but it was kept so quiet that i am not surprised to know that you did not hear about it.
after the inauguration of garfield the investigation and annulling of star-route contracts fraudulently obtained were carried out, whereby two million dollars' worth of these corrupt agreements were rendered null and void.
on the morning of july 2, president garfield was shot by a poor, miserable, unbalanced, and abnormal growth whose name will not be discovered even in the appendix of this work. he was tried, convicted, and sent squealing into eternity.
the president lingered patiently for two months and a half, when he died.
after the accession of president arthur, there occurred floods on the lower mississippi, whereby one hundred thousand people lost their homes.
the administration was not in any way to blame for this.
in 1883 the brooklyn bridge across east river was completed and ready for jumping purposes. it was regarded as a great engineering success at the time, but it is now admitted that it is not high enough. a person jumping from it is not always killed.
the same year the civil service bill became a law. it provides that competitive examinations shall be made of certain applicants for office, whereby mail-carriers must prove that they know how to teach school, and guards in united states penitentiaries are required to describe how to navigate a ship.
possibly recent improvements have been made by which the curriculum is more fitted to the crime, but in the early operations of the law the janitor of a jail had to know what length shadow would be cast by a pole 18 feet 6-1/4 inches high on the third day of july at 11 o'clock 30 min.
and 20 sec. standing on a knoll 35 feet 8-1/8 inches high, provided 8 men in 9 days can erect such a pole working 8 hours per day.
in 1883 letter postage was reduced from three cents to two cents per half-ounce, and in 1885 to two cents per ounce.
in 1884 alaska was organized as a territory, and after digging the snow out of sitka, so that the governor should not take cold in his system, it was made the seat of government.
chinese immigration in 1882 was forbidden for ten years, and in 1884 a treaty with mexico was made, a copy of which is on file in the state department, but not allowed to be loaned to the author for use in this work.
grover cleveland and thomas a. hendricks were nominated and elected at the end of president arthur's term, running against james g. blaine and john a. logan, the republican candidates, also benjamin f. butler and a.
m. west, of mississippi, on the people's ticket, and john p. st. john and william daniel on the prohibition ticket. st. john went home and kept bees, so that he could have honey to eat on his kansas locusts, and daniel swore he would never enter the performing cage of immoral political wild beasts again while reason remained on her throne.
in 1886 a presidential succession law was passed, whereby on the death of the president and the vice-president the order of succession shall be the secretary of state, the secretary of the treasury, the secretary of war, the attorney-general, the postmaster-general, and the secretaries of the navy and of the interior. this gives the secretary of agriculture an extremely remote and rarefied chance at the presidency. still, he should be just as faithful to his trust as he would be if he were nearer the throne.
may 4, 1886, occurred a terrible outbreak of chicago anarchists, whereby seven policemen sent to preserve order were killed by the bursting of an anarchist's bomb. the anarchists were tried and executed, with the exception of ling, who ate a dynamite capsule and passed into rest having had his features, and especially his nose, blown in a swift and earnest manner. death resulted, and whiskers and beer-blossoms are still found embedded in the stone walls of his cell. those who attended the funeral say that ling from a scenic point of view was not a success.
governor altgeld, of illinois, an amateur american, in the summer of 1893 pardoned two of the anarchists who had escaped death by imprisonment.
august 31, 1886, in charleston, occurred several terrible earthquake shocks, which seriously damaged the city and shocked and impaired the nerves and health of hundreds of people.
the noted heroism and pluck of the people of charleston were never shown to greater advantage than on this occasion.
mr. cleveland was again nominated, but was defeated by general benjamin harrison. hon. james g. blaine, of maine, was made secretary of state, and wm. windom, a veteran financier, secretary of the treasury.
secretary windom's tragic death just as he had finished a most brilliant address to the great capitalists of new york after their annual dinner and discussion at delmonico's is, and will ever remain, while life lasts, a most dramatic picture in the author's memory.
personally, the administration of president harrison will be long remembered for the number of deaths among the families of the executive and those of his cabinet and friends.
nebraska, the thirty-seventh state, was admitted march 1, 1867. the name signifies "water valley." colorado, the centennial state, was the thirty-eighth. she was admitted july 1, 1876. six other states have been since admitted when the political sign was right. still, they have not always stuck by the party admitting them to the union. this is the kind of ingratitude which sometimes leads to the reformation of politicians supposed to have been dead in sin.
president harrison's administration was a thoroughly upright and honest one, so far as it was possible for it to be after his party had drifted into the musty catacombs of security in office and the ship of state had become covered with large and expensive barnacles.
as we go to press, his successor, grover cleveland, in the first year of his second administration, is paying a high price for fleeting fame, with the serious question of what to do with the relative coinage of gold and silver, and the democrats in congress, for the first time in the history of the world, are referring each other with hot breath and flashing eye to the platform they adopted at the national convention.
heretofore among the politicians a platform, like that on the railway cars, "is made for the purpose of helping the party to get aboard, but not to ride on."
the columbian exposition and world's fair at chicago in the summer of 1893 eclipsed all former exhibitions, costing more and showing greater artistic taste, especially in its buildings, than anything preceding it.
some gentle warfare resulted from a struggle over the question of opening the "white city" on sunday, and a great deal of bitterness was shown by those who opposed the opening and who had for years favored the sunday closing of niagara. a doubtful victory was obtained by the sunday openers, for so many of the exhibitors closed their departments that visitors did not attend on sunday in paying quantities.
against a thousand odds and over a thousand obstacles, especially the apprehension of asiatic cholera and the actual sudden appearance of a gigantic money panic, chicago, heroic and victorious, carried out her mighty plans and gave to the world an exhibition that won golden opinions from her friends and stilled in dumb wonder the jealousy of her enemies.
in the mean time, the author begs leave to thank his readers for the rapt attention shown in perusing these earnest pages, and to apologize for the tears of sympathy thoughtlessly wrung from eyes unused to weep, by the graphic word-painting and fine education shown by the author.
it was not the intention of the writer to touch the fountain of tears and create wash-outs everywhere, but sometimes tears do one good.
in closing, would it be out of place to say that the stringency of the money market is most noticeable and most painful, and for that reason would it be too much trouble for the owner of this book to refuse to loan it, thereby encouraging its sale and contributing to the comfort of a deserving young man?
the end.
the velveteen rabbit
here was once a velveteen rabbit, and in the beginning he was really splendid. he was fat and bunchy, as a rabbit should be; his coat was spotted brown and white, he had real thread whiskers, and his ears were lined with pink sateen. on christmas morning, when he sat wedged in the top of the boy's stocking, with a sprig of holly between his paws, the effect was charming.
there were other things in the stocking, nuts and oranges and a toy engine, and chocolate almonds and a clockwork mouse, but the rabbit was quite the best of all. for at least two hours the boy loved him, and then aunts and uncles came to dinner, and there was a great rustling of tissue paper and unwrapping of parcels, and in the excitement of looking at all the new presents the velveteen rabbit was forgotten.
christmas morning
for a long time he lived in the toy cupboard or on the nursery floor, and no one thought very much about him. he was naturally shy, and being only made of velveteen, some of the more expensive toys quite snubbed him. the mechanical toys were very superior, and looked down upon every one else; they were full of modern ideas, and pretended they were real. the model boat, who had lived through two seasons and lost most of his paint, caught the tone from them and never missed an opportunity of referring to his rigging in technical terms. the rabbit could not claim to be a model of anything, for he didn't know that real rabbits existed; he thought they were all stuffed with sawdust like himself, and he understood that sawdust was quite out-of-date and should never be mentioned in modern circles. even timothy, the jointed wooden lion, who was made by the disabled soldiers, and should have had broader views, put on airs and pretended he was connected with government. between them all the poor little rabbit was made to feel himself very insignificant and commonplace, and the only person who was kind to him at all was the skin horse.
the skin horse had lived longer in the nursery than any of the others.
he was so old that his brown coat was bald in patches and showed the seams underneath, and most of the hairs in his tail had been pulled out to string bead necklaces. he was wise, for he had seen a long succession of mechanical toys arrive to boast and swagger, and by-and-by break their mainsprings and pass away, and he knew that they were only toys, and would never turn into anything else. for nursery magic is very strange and wonderful, and only those playthings that are old and wise and experienced like the skin horse understand all about it.
"what is real?" asked the rabbit one day, when they were lying side by side near the nursery fender, before nana came to tidy the room. "does it mean having things that buzz inside you and a stick-out handle?"
"real isn't how you are made," said the skin horse. "it's a thing that happens to you. when a child loves you for a long, long time, not just to play with, but really loves you, then you become real."
"does it hurt?" asked the rabbit.
"sometimes," said the skin horse, for he was always truthful. "when you are real you don't mind being hurt."
"does it happen all at once, like being wound up," he asked, "or bit by bit?"
"it doesn't happen all at once," said the skin horse. "you become. it takes a long time. that's why it doesn't happen often to people who break easily, or have sharp edges, or who have to be carefully kept.
generally, by the time you are real, most of your hair has been loved off, and your eyes drop out and you get loose in the joints and very shabby. but these things don't matter at all, because once you are real you can't be ugly, except to people who don't understand."
"i suppose you are real?" said the rabbit. and then he wished he had not said it, for he thought the skin horse might be sensitive. but the skin horse only smiled.
the skin horse tells his story
"the boy's uncle made me real," he said. "that was a great many years ago; but once you are real you can't become unreal again. it lasts for always."
the rabbit sighed. he thought it would be a long time before this magic called real happened to him. he longed to become real, to know what it felt like; and yet the idea of growing shabby and losing his eyes and whiskers was rather sad. he wished that he could become it without these uncomfortable things happening to him.
there was a person called nana who ruled the nursery. sometimes she took no notice of the playthings lying about, and sometimes, for no reason whatever, she went swooping about like a great wind and hustled them away in cupboards. she called this "tidying up," and the playthings all hated it, especially the tin ones. the rabbit didn't mind it so much, for wherever he was thrown he came down soft.
one evening, when the boy was going to bed, he couldn't find the china dog that always slept with him. nana was in a hurry, and it was too much trouble to hunt for china dogs at bedtime, so she simply looked about her, and seeing that the toy cupboard door stood open, she made a swoop.
"here," she said, "take your old bunny! he'll do to sleep with you!"
and she dragged the rabbit out by one ear, and put him into the boy's arms.
that night, and for many nights after, the velveteen rabbit slept in the boy's bed. at first he found it rather uncomfortable, for the boy hugged him very tight, and sometimes he rolled over on him, and sometimes he pushed him so far under the pillow that the rabbit could scarcely breathe. and he missed, too, those long moonlight hours in the nursery, when all the house was silent, and his talks with the skin horse. but very soon he grew to like it, for the boy used to talk to him, and made nice tunnels for him under the bedclothes that he said were like the burrows the real rabbits lived in. and they had splendid games together, in whispers, when nana had gone away to her supper and left the night-light burning on the mantelpiece. and when the boy dropped off to sleep, the rabbit would snuggle down close under his little warm chin and dream, with the boy's hands clasped close round him all night long.
and so time went on, and the little rabbit was very happy-so happy that he never noticed how his beautiful velveteen fur was getting shabbier and shabbier, and his tail becoming unsewn, and all the pink rubbed off his nose where the boy had kissed him.
spring came, and they had long days in the garden, for wherever the boy went the rabbit went too. he had rides in the wheelbarrow, and picnics on the grass, and lovely fairy huts built for him under the raspberry canes behind the flower border. and once, when the boy was called away suddenly to go out to tea, the rabbit was left out on the lawn until long after dusk, and nana had to come and look for him with the candle because the boy couldn't go to sleep unless he was there.
he was wet through with the dew and quite earthy from diving into the burrows the boy had made for him in the flower bed, and nana grumbled as she rubbed him off with a corner of her apron.
spring time
"you must have your old bunny!" she said. "fancy all that fuss for a toy!"
the boy sat up in bed and stretched out his hands.
"give me my bunny!" he said. "you mustn't say that. he isn't a toy.
he's real!"
when the little rabbit heard that he was happy, for he knew that what the skin horse had said was true at last. the nursery magic had happened to him, and he was a toy no longer. he was real. the boy himself had said it.
that night he was almost too happy to sleep, and so much love stirred in his little sawdust heart that it almost burst. and into his boot-button eyes, that had long ago lost their polish, there came a look of wisdom and beauty, so that even nana noticed it next morning when she picked him up, and said, "i declare if that old bunny hasn't got quite a knowing expression!"
that was a wonderful summer!
near the house where they lived there was a wood, and in the long june evenings the boy liked to go there after tea to play. he took the velveteen rabbit with him, and before he wandered off to pick flowers, or play at brigands among the trees, he always made the rabbit a little nest somewhere among the bracken, where he would be quite cosy, for he was a kind-hearted little boy and he liked bunny to be comfortable. one evening, while the rabbit was lying there alone, watching the ants that ran to and fro between his velvet paws in the grass, he saw two strange beings creep out of the tall bracken near him.
they were rabbits like himself, but quite furry and brand-new. they must have been very well made, for their seams didn't show at all, and they changed shape in a queer way when they moved; one minute they were long and thin and the next minute fat and bunchy, instead of always staying the same like he did. their feet padded softly on the ground, and they crept quite close to him, twitching their noses, while the rabbit stared hard to see which side the clockwork stuck out, for he knew that people who jump generally have something to wind them up. but he couldn't see it. they were evidently a new kind of rabbit altogether.
summer days
they stared at him, and the little rabbit stared back. and all the time their noses twitched.
"why don't you get up and play with us?" one of them asked.
"i don't feel like it," said the rabbit, for he didn't want to explain that he had no clockwork.
"ho!" said the furry rabbit. "it's as easy as anything," and he gave a big hop sideways and stood on his hind legs.
"i don't believe you can!" he said.
"i can!" said the little rabbit. "i can jump higher than anything!" he meant when the boy threw him, but of course he didn't want to say so.
"can you hop on your hind legs?" asked the furry rabbit.
that was a dreadful question, for the velveteen rabbit had no hind legs at all! the back of him was made all in one piece, like a pincushion. he sat still in the bracken, and hoped that the other rabbits wouldn't notice.
"i don't want to!" he said again.
but the wild rabbits have very sharp eyes. and this one stretched out his neck and looked.
"he hasn't got any hind legs!" he called out. "fancy a rabbit without any hind legs!" and he began to laugh.
"i have!" cried the little rabbit. "i have got hind legs! i am sitting on them!"
"then stretch them out and show me, like this!" said the wild rabbit.
and he began to whirl round and dance, till the little rabbit got quite dizzy.
"i don't like dancing," he said. "i'd rather sit still!"
but all the while he was longing to dance, for a funny new tickly feeling ran through him, and he felt he would give anything in the world to be able to jump about like these rabbits did.
the strange rabbit stopped dancing, and came quite close. he came so close this time that his long whiskers brushed the velveteen rabbit's ear, and then he wrinkled his nose suddenly and flattened his ears and jumped backwards.
"he doesn't smell right!" he exclaimed. "he isn't a rabbit at all! he isn't real!"
"i am real!" said the little rabbit. "i am real! the boy said so!" and he nearly began to cry.
just then there was a sound of footsteps, and the boy ran past near them, and with a stamp of feet and a flash of white tails the two strange rabbits disappeared.
"come back and play with me!" called the little rabbit. "oh, do come back! i know i am real!"
but there was no answer, only the little ants ran to and fro, and the bracken swayed gently where the two strangers had passed. the velveteen rabbit was all alone.
"oh, dear!" he thought. "why did they run away like that? why couldn't they stop and talk to me?"
for a long time he lay very still, watching the bracken, and hoping that they would come back. but they never returned, and presently the sun sank lower and the little white moths fluttered out, and the boy came and carried him home.
weeks passed, and the little rabbit grew very old and shabby, but the boy loved him just as much. he loved him so hard that he loved all his whiskers off, and the pink lining to his ears turned grey, and his brown spots faded. he even began to lose his shape, and he scarcely looked like a rabbit any more, except to the boy. to him he was always beautiful, and that was all that the little rabbit cared about. he didn't mind how he looked to other people, because the nursery magic had made him real, and when you are real shabbiness doesn't matter.
and then, one day, the boy was ill.
his face grew very flushed, and he talked in his sleep, and his little body was so hot that it burned the rabbit when he held him close.
strange people came and went in the nursery, and a light burned all night and through it all the little velveteen rabbit lay there, hidden from sight under the bedclothes, and he never stirred, for he was afraid that if they found him some one might take him away, and he knew that the boy needed him.
it was a long weary time, for the boy was too ill to play, and the little rabbit found it rather dull with nothing to do all day long.
but he snuggled down patiently, and looked forward to the time when the boy should be well again, and they would go out in the garden amongst the flowers and the butterflies and play splendid games in the raspberry thicket like they used to. all sorts of delightful things he planned, and while the boy lay half asleep he crept up close to the pillow and whispered them in his ear. and presently the fever turned, and the boy got better. he was able to sit up in bed and look at picture-books, while the little rabbit cuddled close at his side. and one day, they let him get up and dress.
it was a bright, sunny morning, and the windows stood wide open. they had carried the boy out on to the balcony, wrapped in a shawl, and the little rabbit lay tangled up among the bedclothes, thinking.
the boy was going to the seaside to-morrow. everything was arranged, and now it only remained to carry out the doctor's orders. they talked about it all, while the little rabbit lay under the bedclothes, with just his head peeping out, and listened. the room was to be disinfected, and all the books and toys that the boy had played with in bed must be burnt.
"hurrah!" thought the little rabbit. "to-morrow we shall go to the seaside!" for the boy had often talked of the seaside, and he wanted very much to see the big waves coming in, and the tiny crabs, and the sand castles.
just then nana caught sight of him.
"how about his old bunny?" she asked.
"that?" said the doctor. "why, it's a mass of scarlet fever germs!-burn it at once. what? nonsense! get him a new one. he mustn't have that any more!"
anxious times
and so the little rabbit was put into a sack with the old picture-books and a lot of rubbish, and carried out to the end of the garden behind the fowl-house. that was a fine place to make a bonfire, only the gardener was too busy just then to attend to it. he had the potatoes to dig and the green peas to gather, but next morning he promised to come quite early and burn the whole lot.
that night the boy slept in a different bedroom, and he had a new bunny to sleep with him. it was a splendid bunny, all white plush with real glass eyes, but the boy was too excited to care very much about it. for to-morrow he was going to the seaside, and that in itself was such a wonderful thing that he could think of nothing else.
and while the boy was asleep, dreaming of the seaside, the little rabbit lay among the old picture-books in the corner behind the fowl-house, and he felt very lonely. the sack had been left untied, and so by wriggling a bit he was able to get his head through the opening and look out. he was shivering a little, for he had always been used to sleeping in a proper bed, and by this time his coat had worn so thin and threadbare from hugging that it was no longer any protection to him. near by he could see the thicket of raspberry canes, growing tall and close like a tropical jungle, in whose shadow he had played with the boy on bygone mornings. he thought of those long sunlit hours in the garden-how happy they were-and a great sadness came over him. he seemed to see them all pass before him, each more beautiful than the other, the fairy huts in the flower-bed, the quiet evenings in the wood when he lay in the bracken and the little ants ran over his paws; the wonderful day when he first knew that he was real. he thought of the skin horse, so wise and gentle, and all that he had told him. of what use was it to be loved and lose one's beauty and become real if it all ended like this? and a tear, a real tear, trickled down his little shabby velvet nose and fell to the ground.
and then a strange thing happened. for where the tear had fallen a flower grew out of the ground, a mysterious flower, not at all like any that grew in the garden. it had slender green leaves the colour of emeralds, and in the centre of the leaves a blossom like a golden cup.
it was so beautiful that the little rabbit forgot to cry, and just lay there watching it. and presently the blossom opened, and out of it there stepped a fairy.
she was quite the loveliest fairy in the whole world. her dress was of pearl and dew-drops, and there were flowers round her neck and in her hair, and her face was like the most perfect flower of all. and she came close to the little rabbit and gathered him up in her arms and kissed him on his velveteen nose that was all damp from crying.
"little rabbit," she said, "don't you know who i am?"
the rabbit looked up at her, and it seemed to him that he had seen her face before, but he couldn't think where.
"i am the nursery magic fairy," she said. "i take care of all the playthings that the children have loved. when they are old and worn out and the children don't need them any more, then i come and take them away with me and turn them into real."
"wasn't i real before?" asked the little rabbit.
"you were real to the boy," the fairy said, "because he loved you. now you shall be real to every one."
the fairy flower
and she held the little rabbit close in her arms and flew with him into the wood.
it was light now, for the moon had risen. all the forest was beautiful, and the fronds of the bracken shone like frosted silver. in the open glade between the tree-trunks the wild rabbits danced with their shadows on the velvet grass, but when they saw the fairy they all stopped dancing and stood round in a ring to stare at her.
"i've brought you a new playfellow," the fairy said. "you must be very kind to him and teach him all he needs to know in rabbit-land, for he is going to live with you for ever and ever!"
and she kissed the little rabbit again and put him down on the grass.
"run and play, little rabbit!" she said.
but the little rabbit sat quite still for a moment and never moved.
for when he saw all the wild rabbits dancing around him he suddenly remembered about his hind legs, and he didn't want them to see that he was made all in one piece. he did not know that when the fairy kissed him that last time she had changed him altogether. and he might have sat there a long time, too shy to move, if just then something hadn't tickled his nose, and before he thought what he was doing he lifted his hind toe to scratch it.
and he found that he actually had hind legs! instead of dingy velveteen he had brown fur, soft and shiny, his ears twitched by themselves, and his whiskers were so long that they brushed the grass.
he gave one leap and the joy of using those hind legs was so great that he went springing about the turf on them, jumping sideways and whirling round as the others did, and he grew so excited that when at last he did stop to look for the fairy she had gone.
he was a real rabbit at last, at home with the other rabbits.
at last! at last!
autumn passed and winter, and in the spring, when the days grew warm and sunny, the boy went out to play in the wood behind the house. and while he was playing, two rabbits crept out from the bracken and peeped at him. one of them was brown all over, but the other had strange markings under his fur, as though long ago he had been spotted, and the spots still showed through. and about his little soft nose and his round black eyes there was something familiar, so that the boy thought to himself:
"why, he looks just like my old bunny that was lost when i had scarlet fever!"
but he never knew that it really was his own bunny, come back to look at the child who had first helped him to be real.
the book of dragons
i. the book of beasts
he happened to be building a palace when the news came, and he left all the bricks kicking about the floor for nurse to clear up but then the news was rather remarkable news. you see, there was a knock at the front door and voices talking downstairs, and lionel thought it was the man come to see about the gas, which had not been allowed to be lighted since the day when lionel made a swing by tying his skipping rope to the gas bracket.
and then, quite suddenly, nurse came in and said, "master lionel, dear, they've come to fetch you to go and be king."
then she made haste to change his smock and to wash his face and hands and brush his hair, and all the time she was doing it lionel kept wriggling and fidgeting and saying, "oh, don't, nurse," and, "i'm sure my ears are quite clean," or, "never mind my hair, it's all right," and, "that'll do."
"you're going on as if you was going to be an eel instead of a king,"
said nurse.
the minute nurse let go for a moment lionel bolted off without waiting for his clean handkerchief, and in the drawing room there were two very grave-looking gentlemen in red robes with fur, and gold coronets with velvet sticking up out of the middle like the cream in the very expensive jam tarts.
they bowed low to lionel, and the gravest one said: "sire, your great-great-great-great-great-grandfather, the king of this country, is dead, and now you have got to come and be king."
"yes, please, sir," said lionel, "when does it begin?"
"you will be crowned this afternoon," said the grave gentleman who was not quite so grave-looking as the other.
"would you like me to bring nurse, or what time would you like me to be fetched, and hadn't i better put on my velvet suit with the lace collar?" said lionel, who had often been out to tea.
"your nurse will be removed to the palace later. no, never mind about changing your suit; the royal robes will cover all that up."
the grave gentlemen led the way to a coach with eight white horses, which was drawn up in front of the house where lionel lived. it was no.
7, on the left-hand side of the street as you go up.
lionel ran upstairs at the last minute, and he kissed nurse and said:
"thank you for washing me. i wish i'd let you do the other ear.
no there's no time now. give me the hanky. good-bye, nurse."
"good-bye, ducky," said nurse. "be a good little king now, and say 'please' and 'thank you,' and remember to pass the cake to the little girls, and don't have more than two helps of anything."
so off went lionel to be made a king. he had never expected to be a king any more than you have, so it was all quite new to him so new that he had never even thought of it. and as the coach went through the town he had to bite his tongue to be quite sure it was real, because if his tongue was real it showed he wasn't dreaming. half an hour before he had been building with bricks in the nursery; and now the streets were all fluttering with flags; every window was crowded with people waving handkerchiefs and scattering flowers; there were scarlet soldiers everywhere along the pavements, and all the bells of all the churches were ringing like mad, and like a great song to the music of their ringing he heard thousands of people shouting, "long live lionel! long live our little king!"
he was a little sorry at first that he had not put on his best clothes, but he soon forgot to think about that. if he had been a girl he would very likely have bothered about it the whole time.
as they went along, the grave gentlemen, who were the chancellor and the prime minister, explained the things which lionel did not understand.
"i thought we were a republic," said lionel. "i'm sure there hasn't been a king for some time."
"sire, your great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's death happened when my grandfather was a little boy," said the prime minister, "and since then your loyal people have been saving up to buy you a crown so much a week, you know, according to people's means sixpence a week from those who have first-rate pocket money, down to a halfpenny a week from those who haven't so much. you know it's the rule that the crown must be paid for by the people."
"but hadn't my great-great-however-much-it-is-grandfather a crown?"
"yes, but he sent it to be tinned over, for fear of vanity, and he had had all the jewels taken out, and sold them to buy books. he was a strange man; a very good king he was, but he had his faults he was fond of books. almost with his last breath he sent the crown to be tinned and he never lived to pay the tinsmith's bill."
here the prime minister wiped away a tear, and just then the carriage stopped and lionel was taken out of the carriage to be crowned. being crowned is much more tiring work than you would suppose, and by the time it was over, and lionel had worn the royal robes for an hour or two and had had his hand kissed by everybody whose business it was to do it, he was quite worn out, and was very glad to get into the palace nursery.
nurse was there, and tea was ready: seedy cake and plummy cake, and jam and hot buttered toast, and the prettiest china with red and gold and blue flowers on it, and real tea, and as many cups of it as you liked.
after tea lionel said: "i think i should like a book. will you get me one, nurse?"
"bless the child," said nurse. "you don't suppose you've lost the use of your legs with just being a king? run along, do, and get your books yourself."
so lionel went down into the library. the prime minister and the chancellor were there, and when lionel came in they bowed very low, and were beginning to ask lionel most politely what on earth he was coming bothering for now when lionel cried out: "oh, what a worldful of books!
are they yours?"
"they are yours, your majesty," answered the chancellor. "they were the property of the late king, your great-great "
"yes, i know," lionel interrupted. "well, i shall read them all. i love to read. i am so glad i learned to read."
"if i might venture to advise your majesty," said the prime minister, "i should not read these books. your great "
"yes?" said lionel, quickly.
"he was a very good king oh, yes, really a very superior king in his way, but he was a little well, strange."
"mad?" asked lionel, cheerfully.
"no, no" both the gentlemen were sincerely shocked. "not mad; but if i may express it so, he was er too clever by half. and i should not like a little king of mine to have anything to do with his books."
lionel looked puzzled.
"the fact is," the chancellor went on, twisting his red beard in an agitated way, "your great "
"go on," said lionel.
" was called a wizard."
"but he wasn't?"
"of course not a most worthy king was your great "
"i see."
"but i wouldn't touch his books."
"just this one," cried lionel, laying his hands on the cover of a great brown book that lay on the study table. it had gold patterns on the brown leather, and gold clasps with turquoises and rubies in the twists of them, and gold corners, so that the leather should not wear out too quickly.
"i must look at this one," lionel said, for on the back in big letters he read: the book of beasts.
the chancellor said, "don't be a silly little king."
but lionel had got the gold clasps undone, and he opened the first page, and there was a beautiful butterfly all red, and brown, and yellow, and blue, so beautifully painted that it looked as if it were alive.
"there," said lionel, "isn't that lovely? why "
but as he spoke the beautiful butterfly fluttered its many-colored wings on the yellow old page of the book, and flew up and out of the window.
"well!" said the prime minister, as soon as he could speak for the lump of wonder that had got into his throat and tried to choke him, "that's magic, that is."
but before he had spoken, the king had turned the next page, and there was a shining bird complete and beautiful in every blue feather of him.
under him was written, "blue bird of paradise," and while the king gazed enchanted at the charming picture the blue bird fluttered his wings on the yellow page and spread them and flew out of the book.
then the prime minister snatched the book away from the king and shut it up on the blank page where the bird had been, and put it on a very high shelf. and the chancellor gave the king a good shaking, and said:
"you're a naughty, disobedient little king!" and was very angry indeed.
"i don't see that i've done any harm," said lionel. he hated being shaken, as all boys do; he would much rather have been slapped.
"no harm?" said the chancellor. "ah but what do you know about it?
that's the question. how do you know what might have been on the next page a snake or a worm, or a centipede or a revolutionist, or something like that."
"well, i'm sorry if i've vexed you," said lionel. "come, let's kiss and be friends." so he kissed the prime minister, and they settled down for a nice quiet game of noughts and crosses while the chancellor went to add up his accounts.
but when lionel was in bed he could not sleep for thinking of the book, and when the full moon was shining with all her might and light he got up and crept down to the library and climbed up and got the book of beasts.
he took it outside to the terrace, where the moonlight was as bright as day, and he opened the book, and saw the empty pages with "butterfly"
and "blue bird of paradise" underneath, and then he turned the next page. there was some sort of red thing sitting under a palm tree, and under it was written "dragon." the dragon did not move, and the king shut up the book rather quickly and went back to bed.
but the next day he wanted another look, so he took the book out into the garden, and when he undid the clasps with the rubies and turquoises, the book opened all by itself at the picture with "dragon" underneath, and the sun shone full on the page. and then, quite suddenly, a great red dragon came out of the book and spread vast scarlet wings and flew away across the garden to the far hills, and lionel was left with the empty page before him, for the page was quite empty except for the green palm tree and the yellow desert, and the little streaks of red where the paintbrush had gone outside the pencil outline of the red dragon.
and then lionel felt that he had indeed done it. he had not been king twenty-four hours, and already he had let loose a red dragon to worry his faithful subjects' lives out. and they had been saving up so long to buy him a crown, and everything!
lionel began to cry.
the chancellor and the prime minister and the nurse all came running to see what was the matter. and when they saw the book they understood, and the chancellor said: "you naughty little king! put him to bed, nurse, and let him think over what he's done."
"perhaps, my lord," said the prime minister, "we'd better first find out just exactly what he has done."
then lionel, in floods of tears, said: "it's a red dragon, and it's gone flying away to the hills, and i am so sorry, and, oh, do forgive me!"
but the prime minister and the chancellor had other things to think of than forgiving lionel. they hurried off to consult the police and see what could be done. everyone did what they could. they sat on committees and stood on guard, and lay in wait for the dragon, but he stayed up in the hills, and there was nothing more to be done. the faithful nurse, meanwhile, did not neglect her duty. perhaps she did more than anyone else, for she slapped the king and put him to bed without his tea, and when it got dark she would not give him a candle to read by.
"you are a naughty little king," she said, "and nobody will love you."
next day the dragon was still quiet, though the more poetic of lionel's subjects could see the redness of the dragon shining through the green trees quite plainly. so lionel put on his crown and sat on his throne and said he wanted to make some laws.
and i need hardly say that though the prime minister and the chancellor and the nurse might have the very poorest opinion of lionel's private judgement, and might even slap him and send him to bed, the minute he got on his throne and set his crown on his head, he became infallible which means that everything he said was right, and that he couldn't possibly make a mistake. so when he said: "there is to be a law forbidding people to open books in schools or elsewhere" he had the support of at least half of his subjects, and the other half the grown-up half pretended to think he was quite right.
then he made a law that everyone should always have enough to eat. and this pleased everyone except the ones who had always had too much.
and when several other nice new laws were made and written down he went home and made mud-houses and was very happy. and he said to his nurse:
"people will love me now i've made such a lot of pretty new laws for them."
but nurse said: "don't count your chickens, my dear. you haven't seen the last of that dragon yet."
now, the next day was saturday. and in the afternoon the dragon suddenly swooped down upon the common in all his hideous redness, and carried off the soccer players, umpires, goal-posts, ball, and all.
then the people were very angry indeed, and they said: "we might as well be a republic. after saving up all these years to get his crown, and everything!"
and wise people shook their heads and foretold a decline in the national love of sport. and, indeed, soccer was not at all popular for some time afterward.
lionel did his best to be a good king during the week, and the people were beginning to forgive him for letting the dragon out of the book.
"after all," they said, "soccer is a dangerous game, and perhaps it is wise to discourage it."
popular opinion held that the soccer players, being tough and hard, had disagreed with the dragon so much that he had gone away to some place where they only play cats' cradle and games that do not make you hard and tough.
all the same, parliament met on the saturday afternoon, a convenient time, for most of the members would be free to attend, to consider the dragon. but unfortunately the dragon, who had only been asleep, woke up because it was saturday, and he considered the parliament, and afterwards there were not any members left, so they tried to make a new parliament, but being a member of parliament had somehow grown as unpopular as soccer playing, and no one would consent to be elected, so they had to do without a parliament. when the next saturday came around everyone was a little nervous, but the red dragon was pretty quiet that day and only ate an orphanage.
lionel was very, very unhappy. he felt that it was his disobedience that had brought this trouble on the parliament and the orphanage and the soccer players, and he felt that it was his duty to try and do something. the question was, what?
the blue bird that had come out of the book used to sing very nicely in the palace rose garden, and the butterfly was very tame, and would perch on his shoulder when he walked among the tall lilies: so lionel saw that all the creatures in the book of beasts could not be wicked, like the dragon, and he thought: "suppose i could get another beast out who would fight the dragon?"
so he took the book of beasts out into the rose garden and opened the page next to the one where the dragon had been just a tiny bit to see what the name was. he could only see "cora," but he felt the middle of the page swelling up thick with the creature that was trying to come out, and it was only by putting the book down and sitting on it suddenly, very hard, that he managed to get it shut. then he fastened the clasps with the rubies and turquoises in them and sent for the chancellor, who had been ill since saturday, and so had not been eaten with the rest of the parliament, and he said: "what animal ends in 'cora'?"
the chancellor answered: "the manticora, of course."
"what is he like?" asked the king.
"he is the sworn foe of dragons," said the chancellor. "he drinks their blood. he is yellow, with the body of a lion and the face of a man. i wish we had a few manticoras here now. but the last died hundreds of years ago worse luck!"
then the king ran and opened the book at the page that had "cora" on it, and there was the picture manticora, all yellow, with a lion's body and a man's face, just as the chancellor had said. and under the picture was written, "manticora."
in a few minutes the manticora came sleepily out of the book, rubbing its eyes with its hands and mewing piteously. it seemed very stupid, and when lionel gave it a push and said, "go along and fight the dragon, do," it put its tail between its legs and fairly ran away. it went and hid behind the town hall, and at night when the people were asleep it went around and ate all the pussy-cats in the town. and then it mewed more than ever. and on the saturday morning, when people were a little timid about going out, because the dragon had no regular hour for calling, the manticora went up and down the streets and drank all the milk that was left in the cans at the doors for people's teas, and it ate the cans as well.
and just when it had finished the very last little halfpenny worth, which was short measure, because the milkman's nerves were quite upset, the red dragon came down the street looking for the manticora. it edged off when it saw him coming, for it was not at all the dragon-fighting kind; and, seeing no other door open, the poor, hunted creature took refuge in the general post office, and there the dragon found it, trying to conceal itself among the ten o'clock mail. the dragon fell on the manticora at once, and the mail was no defense. the mewings were heard all over the town. all the kitties and the milk the manticora had had seemed to have strengthened its mew wonderfully. then there was a sad silence, and presently the people whose windows looked that way saw the dragon come walking down the steps of the general post office spitting fire and smoke, together with tufts of manticora fur, and the fragments of the registered letters. things were growing very serious. however popular the king might become during the week, the dragon was sure to do something on saturday to upset the people's loyalty.
the dragon was a perfect nuisance for the whole of saturday, except during the hour of noon, and then he had to rest under a tree or he would have caught fire from the heat of the sun. you see, he was very hot to begin with.
at last came a saturday when the dragon actually walked into the royal nursery and carried off the king's own pet rocking horse. then the king cried for six days, and on the seventh he was so tired that he had to stop. he heard the blue bird singing among the roses and saw the butterfly fluttering among the lilies, and he said: "nurse, wipe my face, please. i am not going to cry any more."
nurse washed his face, and told him not to be a silly little king.
"crying," said she, "never did anyone any good yet."
"i don't know," said the little king, "i seem to see better, and to hear better now that i've cried for a week. now, nurse, dear, i know i'm right, so kiss me in case i never come back. i must try to see if i can't save the people."
"well, if you must, you must," said nurse, "but don't tear your clothes or get your feet wet."
so off he went.
the blue bird sang more sweetly than ever, and the butterfly shone more brightly, as lionel once more carried the book of beasts out into the rose garden, and opened it very quickly, so that he might not be afraid and change his mind. the book fell open wide, almost in the middle, and there was written at the bottom of the page, "hippogriff," and before lionel had time to see what the picture was, there was a fluttering of great wings and a stamping of hoofs, and a sweet, soft, friendly neighing; and there came out of the book a beautiful white horse with a long, long, white mane and a long, long, white tail, and he had great wings like swan's wings, and the softest, kindest eyes in the world, and he stood there among the roses.
the hippogriff rubbed its silky-soft, milky white nose against the little king's shoulder, and the little king thought: "but for the wings you are very like my poor, dear lost rocking horse." and the blue bird's song was very loud and sweet.
then suddenly the king saw coming through the sky the great straggling, sprawling, wicked shape of the red dragon. and he knew at once what he must do. he caught up the book of beasts and jumped on the back of the gentle, beautiful hippogriff, and leaning down he whispered in the sharp, white ear: "fly, dear hippogriff, fly your very fastest to the pebbly waste."
and when the dragon saw them start, he turned and flew after them, with his great wings flapping like clouds at sunset, and the hippogriff's wide wings were snowy as clouds at moonrise.
when the people in the town saw the dragon fly off after the hippogriff and the king they all came out of their houses to look, and when they saw the two disappear they made up their minds to the worst, and began to think what they would wear for court mourning.
but the dragon could not catch the hippogriff. the red wings were bigger than the white ones, but they were not so strong, and so the white-winged horse flew away and away and away, with the dragon pursuing, till he reached the very middle of the pebbly waste.
now, the pebbly waste is just like the parts of the seaside where there is no sand all round, loose, shifting stones, and there is no grass there and no tree within a hundred miles of it.
lionel jumped off the white horse's back in the very middle of the pebbly waste, and he hurriedly unclasped the book of beasts and laid it open on the pebbles. then he clattered among the pebbles in his haste to get back on to his white horse, and had just jumped on when up came the dragon. he was flying very feebly, and looking around everywhere for a tree, for it was just on the stroke of twelve, the sun was shining like a gold guinea in the blue sky, and there was not a tree for a hundred miles.
the white-winged horse flew around and around the dragon as he writhed on the dry pebbles. he was getting very hot: indeed, parts of him even had begun to smoke. he knew that he must certainly catch fire in another minute unless he could get under a tree. he made a snatch with his red claws at the king and hippogriff, but he was too feeble to reach them, and besides, he did not dare to overexert himself for fear he should get any hotter.
it was then that he saw the book of beasts lying on the pebbles, open at the page with "dragon" written at the bottom. he looked and he hesitated, and he looked again, and then, with one last squirm of rage, the dragon wriggled himself back into the picture and sat down under the palm tree, and the page was a little singed as he went in.
as soon as lionel saw that the dragon had really been obliged to go and sit under his own palm tree because it was the only tree there, he jumped off his horse and shut the book with a bang.
"oh, hurrah!" he cried. "now we really have done it."
and he clasped the book very tightly with the turquoise and ruby clasps.
"oh, my precious hippogriff," he cried. "you are the bravest, dearest, most beautiful "
"hush," whispered the hippogriff modestly. "don't you see that we are not alone?"
and indeed there was quite a crowd round them on the pebbly waste: the prime minister and the parliament and the soccer players and the orphanage and the manticora and the rocking horse, and indeed everyone who had been eaten by the dragon. you see, it was impossible for the dragon to take them into the book with him it was a tight fit even for one dragon so, of course, he had to leave them outside.
they all got home somehow, and all lived happy ever after.
when the king asked the manticora where he would like to live he begged to be allowed to go back into the book. "i do not care for public life,"
he said.
of course he knew his way onto his own page, so there was no danger of his opening the book at the wrong page and letting out a dragon or anything. so he got back into his picture and has never come out since:
that is why you will never see a manticora as long as you live, except in a picture-book. and of course he left the kitties outside, because there was no room for them in the book and the milk cans too.
then the rocking horse begged to be allowed to go and live on the hippogriff's page of the book. "i should like," he said, "to live somewhere where dragons can't get at me."
so the beautiful, white-winged hippogriff showed him the way in, and there he stayed till the king had him taken out for his great-great-great-great-grandchildren to play with.
as for the hippogriff, he accepted the position of the king's own rocking horse a situation left vacant by the retirement of the wooden one. and the blue bird and the butterfly sing and flutter among the lilies and roses of the palace garden to this very day.
ii. uncle james, or the purple stranger
the princess and the gardener's boy were playing in the backyard.
"what will you do when you grow up, princess?" asked the gardener's boy.
"i should like to marry you, tom," said the princess. "would you mind?"
"no," said the gardener's boy. "i shouldn't mind much. i'll marry you if you like if i have time."
for the gardener's boy meant, as soon as he was grown up, to be a general and a poet and a prime minister and an admiral and a civil engineer. meanwhile, he was top of all his classes at school, and tip-top of the geography class.
as for the princess mary ann, she was a very good little girl, and everyone loved her. she was always kind and polite, even to her uncle james and to other people whom she did not like very much; and though she was not very clever, for a princess, she always tried to do her lessons. even if you know perfectly well that you can't do your lessons, you may as well try, and sometimes you find that by some fortunate accident they really are done. then the princess had a truly good heart: she was always kind to her pets. she never slapped her hippopotamus when it broke her dolls in its playful gambols, and she never forgot to feed her rhinoceroses in their little hutch in the backyard. her elephant was devoted to her, and sometimes mary ann made her nurse quite cross by smuggling the dear little thing up to bed with her and letting it go to sleep with its long trunk laid lovingly across her throat, and its pretty head cuddled under the royal right ear.
when the princess had been good all through the week for, like all real, live, nice children, she was sometimes naughty, but never bad nurse would allow her to ask her little friends to come on wednesday morning early and spend the day, because wednesday is the end of the week in that country. then, in the afternoon, when all the little dukes and duchesses and marquises and countesses had finished their rice pudding and had had their hands and faces washed after it, nurse would say: "now, my dears, what would you like to do this afternoon?" just as if she didn't know. and the answer would be always the same:
"oh, do let's go to the zoological gardens and ride on the big guinea pig and feed the rabbits and hear the dormouse asleep."
so their pinafores were taken off and they all went to the zoological gardens, where twenty of them could ride at a time on the guinea pig, and where even the little ones could feed the great rabbits if some grown-up person were kind enough to lift them up for the purpose.
there always was some such person, because in rotundia everybody was kind except one.
now that you have read as far as this you know, of course, that the kingdom of rotundia was a very remarkable place; and if you are a thoughtful child as of course you are you will not need me to tell you what was the most remarkable thing about it. but in case you are not a thoughtful child and it is just possible of course that you are not i will tell you at once what that most remarkable thing was. all the animals were the wrong sizes! and this was how it happened.
in old, old, olden times, when all our world was just loose earth and air and fire and water mixed up anyhow like a pudding, and spinning around like mad trying to get the different things to settle into their proper places, a round piece of earth got loose and went spinning away by itself across the water, which was just beginning to try to get spread out smooth into a real sea. and as the great round piece of earth flew away, going around and around as hard as it could, it met a long piece of hard rock that had got loose from another part of the puddingy mixture, and the rock was so hard, and was going so fast, that it ran its point through the round piece of earth and stuck out on the other side of it, so that the two together were like a very-very-much-too-big spinning top.
i am afraid all this is very dull, but you know geography is never quite lively, and after all, i must give you a little information even in a fairy tale like the powder in jam.
well, when the pointed rock smashed into the round bit of earth the shock was so great that it set them spinning together through the air which was just getting into its proper place, like all the rest of the things only, as luck would have it, they forgot which way around they had been going, and began to spin around the wrong way. presently center of gravity a great giant who was managing the whole business woke up in the middle of the earth and began to grumble.
"hurry up," he said. "come down and lie still, can't you?"
so the rock with the round piece of earth fell into the sea, and the point of the rock went into a hole that just fitted it in the stony sea bottom, and there it spun around the wrong way seven times and then lay still. and that round piece of land became, after millions of years, the kingdom of rotundia.
this is the end of the geography lesson. and now for just a little natural history, so that we may not feel that we are quite wasting our time. of course, the consequence of the island having spun around the wrong way was that when the animals began to grow on the island they all grew the wrong sizes. the guinea pig, as you know, was as big as our elephants, and the elephant dear little pet was the size of the silly, tiny, black-and-tan dogs that ladies carry sometimes in their muffs. the rabbits were about the size of our rhinoceroses, and all about the wild parts of the island they had made their burrows as big as railway tunnels. the dormouse, of course, was the biggest of all the creatures.
i can't tell you how big he was. even if you think of elephants it will not help you at all. luckily there was only one of him, and he was always asleep. otherwise i don't think the rotundians could have borne with him. as it was, they made him a house, and it saved the expense of a brass band, because no band could possibly have been heard when the dormouse was talking in his sleep.
the men and women and children in this wonderful island were quite the right size, because their ancestors had come over with the conqueror long after the island had settled down and the animals grown on it.
now the natural history lesson is over, and if you have been attending, you know more about rotundia than anyone there did, except three people:
the lord chief schoolmaster, the princess's uncle who was a magician, and knew everything without learning it and tom, the gardener's son.
tom had learned more at school than anyone else, because he wished to take a prize. the prize offered by the lord chief schoolmaster was a history of rotundia, beautifully bound, with the royal arms on the back. but after that day when the princess said she meant to marry tom, the gardener's boy thought it over, and he decided that the best prize in the world would be the princess, and this was the prize tom meant to take; and when you are a gardener's son and have decided to marry a princess, you will find that the more you learn at school the better.
the princess always played with tom on the days when the little dukes and marquises did not come to tea and when he told her he was almost sure of the first prize, she clapped her hands and said: "dear tom, dear good, clever tom, you deserve all the prizes. and i will give you my pet elephant and you can keep him till we're married."
the pet elephant was called fido, and the gardener's son took him away in his coat pocket. he was the dearest little elephant you ever saw about six inches long. but he was very, very wise he could not have been wiser if he had been a mile high. he lay down comfortably in tom's pocket, and when tom put in his hand, fido curled his little trunk around tom's fingers with an affectionate confidence that made the boy's heart warm to his new little pet. what with the elephant, and the princess's affection, and the knowledge that the very next day he would receive the history of rotundia, beautifully bound, with the royal arms on the cover, tom could hardly sleep a wink. and, besides, the dog did bark so terribly. there was only one dog in rotundia the kingdom could not afford to keep more than one: he was a mexican lapdog of the kind that in most parts of the world only measures seven inches from the end of his dear nose to the tip of his darling tail but in rotundia he was bigger than i can possibly expect you to believe. and when he barked, his bark was so large that it filled up all the night and left no room for sleep or dreams or polite conversation, or anything else at all. he never barked at things that went on in the island he was too large-minded for that; but when ships went blundering by in the dark, tumbling over the rocks at the end of the island, he would bark once or twice, just to let the ships know that they couldn't come playing about there just as they liked.
but on this particular night he barked and barked and barked and the princess said, "oh dear, oh dear, i wish he wouldn't, i am so sleepy."
and tom said to himself, "i wonder whatever is the matter. as soon as it's light i'll go and see."
so when it began to be pretty pink-and-yellow daylight, tom got up and went out. and all the time the mexican lapdog barked so that the houses shook, and the tiles on the roof of the palace rattled like milk cans in a cart whose horse is frisky.
"i'll go to the pillar," thought tom, as he went through the town. the pillar, of course, was the top of the piece of rock that had stuck itself through rotundia millions of years before, and made it spin around the wrong way. it was quite in the middle of the island, and stuck up ever so far, and when you were at the top you could see a great deal farther than when you were not.
as tom went out from the town and across the downs, he thought what a pretty sight it was to see the rabbits in the bright, dewy morning, frisking with their young ones by the mouths of their burrows. he did not go very near the rabbits, of course, because when a rabbit of that size is at play it does not always look where it is going, and it might easily have crushed tom with its foot, and then it would have been very sorry afterward. and tom was a kind boy, and would not have liked to make even a rabbit unhappy. earwigs in our country often get out of the way when they think you are going to walk on them. they too have kind hearts, and they would not like you to be sorry afterward.
so tom went on, looking at the rabbits and watching the morning grow more and more red and golden. and the mexican lapdog barked all the time, till the church bells tinkled, and the chimney of the apple factory rocked again.
but when tom got to the pillar, he saw that he would not need to climb to the top to find out what the dog was barking at.
for there, by the pillar, lay a very large purple dragon. his wings were like old purple umbrellas that have been very much rained on, and his head was large and bald, like the top of a purple toadstool, and his tail, which was purple too, was very, very, very long and thin and tight, like the lash of a carriage whip.
it was licking one of its purple umbrella-y wings, and every now and then it moaned and leaned its head back against the rocky pillar as though it felt faint. tom saw at once what had happened. a flight of purple dragons must have crossed the island in the night, and this poor one must have knocked its wing and broken it against the pillar.
everyone is kind to everyone in rotundia, and tom was not afraid of the dragon, although he had never spoken to one before. he had often watched them flying across the sea, but he had never expected to get to know one personally.
so now he said: "i am afraid you don't feel quite well."
the dragon shook his large purple head. he could not speak, but like all other animals, he could understand well enough when he liked.
"can i get you anything?" asked tom, politely.
the dragon opened his purple eyes with an inquiring smile.
"a bun or two, now," said tom, coaxingly. "there's a beautiful bun tree quite close."
the dragon opened a great purple mouth and licked his purple lips, so tom ran and shook the bun tree, and soon came back with an armful of fresh currant buns, and as he came he picked a few of the bath kind, which grow on the low bushes near the pillar.
because, of course, another consequence of the island's having spun the wrong way is that all the things we have to make buns and cakes and shortbread grow on trees and bushes, but in rotundia they have to make their cauliflowers and cabbages and carrots and apples and onions, just as our cooks make puddings and turnovers.
tom gave all the buns to the dragon, saying: "here, try to eat a little.
you'll soon feel better then."
the dragon ate up the buns, nodded rather ungraciously, and began to lick his wing again. so tom left him and went back to the town with the news, and everyone was so excited at a real live dragon's being on the island a thing that had never happened before that they all went out to look at it, instead of going to the prize-giving, and the lord chief schoolmaster went with the rest. now, he had tom's prize, the history of rotundia, in his pocket the one bound in calf, with the royal arms on the cover and it happened to drop out, and the dragon ate it, so tom never got the prize after all. but the dragon, when he had gotten it, did not like it.
"perhaps it's all for the best," said tom. "i might not have liked that prize either, if i had gotten it."
it happened to be a wednesday, so when the princess's friends were asked what they would like to do, all the little dukes and marquises and earls said, "let's go and see the dragon." but the little duchesses and marchionesses and countesses said they were afraid.
then princess mary ann spoke up royally, and said, "don't be silly, because it's only in fairy stories and histories of england and things like that, that people are unkind and want to hurt each other. in rotundia everyone is kind, and no one has anything to be afraid of, unless they're naughty; and then we know it's for our own good. let's all go and see the dragon. we might take him some acid drops." so they went. and all the titled children took it in turns to feed the dragon with acid drops, and he seemed pleased and flattered, and wagged as much of his purple tail as he could get at conveniently; for it was a very, very long tail indeed. but when it came to the princess's turn to give an acid drop to the dragon, he smiled a very wide smile, and wagged his tail to the very last long inch of it, as much as to say, "oh, you nice, kind, pretty little princess." but deep down in his wicked purple heart he was saying, "oh, you nice, fat, pretty little princess, i should like to eat you instead of these silly acid drops." but of course nobody heard him except the princess's uncle, and he was a magician, and accustomed to listening at doors. it was part of his trade.
now, you will remember that i told you there was one wicked person in rotundia, and i cannot conceal from you any longer that this complete bad was the princess's uncle james. magicians are always bad, as you know from your fairy books, and some uncles are bad, as you see by the babes in the wood, or the norfolk tragedy, and one james at least was bad, as you have learned from your english history. and when anyone is a magician, and is also an uncle, and is named james as well, you need not expect anything nice from him. he is a threefold complete bad and he will come to no good.
uncle james had long wanted to get rid of the princess and have the kingdom to himself. he did not like many things a nice kingdom was almost the only thing he cared for but he had never seen his way quite clearly, because everyone is so kind in rotundia that wicked spells will not work there, but run off those blameless islanders like water off a duck's back. now, however, uncle james thought there might be a chance for him because he knew that now there were two wicked people on the island who could stand by each other himself and the dragon. he said nothing, but he exchanged a meaningful glance with the dragon, and everyone went home to tea. and no one had seen the meaningful glance except tom.
tom went home, and told his elephant all about it. the intelligent little creature listened carefully, and then climbed from tom's knee to the table, on which stood an ornamental calendar that the princess had given tom for a christmas present. with its tiny trunk the elephant pointed out a date the fifteenth of august, the princess's birthday, and looked anxiously at its master.
"what is it, fido good little elephant then?" said tom, and the sagacious animal repeated its former gesture. then tom understood.
"oh, something is to happen on her birthday? all right. i'll be on the lookout." and he was.
at first the people of rotundia were quite pleased with the dragon, who lived by the pillar and fed himself from the bun trees, but by-and-by he began to wander. he would creep into the burrows made by the great rabbits; and excursionists, sporting on the downs, would see his long, tight, whiplike tail wriggling down a burrow and out of sight, and before they had time to say, "there he goes," his ugly purple head would come poking out from another rabbit-hole perhaps just behind them or laugh softly to itself just in their ears. and the dragon's laugh was not a merry one. this sort of hide-and-seek amused people at first, but by-and-by it began to get on their nerves: and if you don't know what that means, ask mother to tell you next time you are playing blind man's buff when she has a headache. then the dragon got into the habit of cracking his tail, as people crack whips, and this also got on people's nerves. then, too, little things began to be missed. and you know how unpleasant that is, even in a private school, and in a public kingdom it is, of course, much worse. the things that were missed were nothing much at first a few little elephants, a hippopotamus or two, and some giraffes, and things like that. it was nothing much, as i say, but it made people feel uncomfortable. then one day a favorite rabbit of the princess's, called frederick, mysteriously disappeared, and then came a terrible morning when the mexican lapdog was missing. he had barked ever since the dragon came to the island, and people had grown quite used to the noise. so when his barking suddenly ceased it woke everybody up and they all went out to see what was the matter. and the lapdog was gone!
a boy was sent to wake the army, so that it might look for him. but the army was gone too! and now the people began to be frightened. then uncle james came out onto the terrace of the palace, and he made the people a speech. he said: "friends fellow citizens i cannot disguise from myself or from you that this purple dragon is a poor penniless exile, a helpless alien in our midst, and, besides, he is a is no end of a dragon."
the people thought of the dragon's tail and said, "hear, hear."
uncle james went on: "something has happened to a gentle and defenseless member of our community. we don't know what has happened."
everyone thought of the rabbit named frederick, and groaned.
"the defenses of our country have been swallowed up," said uncle james.
everyone thought of the poor army.
"there is only one thing to be done." uncle james was warming to his subject. "could we ever forgive ourselves if by neglecting a simple precaution we lost more rabbits or even, perhaps, our navy, our police, and our fire brigade? for i warn you that the purple dragon will respect nothing, however sacred."
everyone thought of themselves and they said, "what is the simple precaution?"
then uncle james said: "tomorrow is the dragon's birthday. he is accustomed to have a present on his birthday. if he gets a nice present he will be in a hurry to take it away and show it to his friends, and he will fly off and never come back."
the crowd cheered wildly and the princess from her balcony clapped her hands.
"the present the dragon expects," said uncle james, cheerfully, "is rather an expensive one. but, when we give, it should not be in a grudging spirit, especially to visitors. what the dragon wants is a princess. we have only one princess, it is true; but far be it from us to display a miserly temper at such a moment. and the gift is worthless that costs the giver nothing. your readiness to give up your princess will only show how generous you are."
the crowd began to cry, for they loved their princess, though they quite saw that their first duty was to be generous and give the poor dragon what it wanted.
the princess began to cry, for she did not want to be anybody's birthday present especially a purple dragon's. and tom began to cry because he was so angry.
he went straight home and told his little elephant; and the elephant cheered him up so much that presently the two grew quite absorbed in a top that the elephant was spinning with his little trunk.
early in the morning tom went to the palace. he looked out across the downs there were hardly any rabbits playing there now and then he gathered white roses and threw them at the princess's window till she woke up and looked out.
"come up and kiss me," she said.
so tom climbed up the white rosebush and kissed the princess through the window, and said: "many happy returns of the day."
then mary ann began to cry, and said: "oh, tom how can you? when you know quite well "
"oh, don't," said tom. "why, mary ann, my precious, my princess what do you think i should be doing while the dragon was getting his birthday present? don't cry, my own little mary ann! fido and i have arranged everything. you've only got to do as you are told."
"is that all?" said the princess. "oh that's easy i've often done that!"
then tom told her what she was to do. and she kissed him again and again. "oh, you dear, good, clever tom," she said. "how glad i am that i gave you fido. you two have saved me. you dears!"
the next morning uncle james put on his best coat and hat and the vest with the gold snakes on it he was a magician, and he had a bright taste in vests and he called with a cab to take the princess out.
"come, little birthday present," he said tenderly. "the dragon will be so pleased. and i'm glad to see you're not crying. you know, my child, we cannot begin too young to learn to think of the happiness of others rather than our own. i should not like my dear little niece to be selfish, or to wish to deny a trivial pleasure to a poor, sick dragon, far from his home and friends."
the princess said she would try not to be selfish.
presently the cab drew up near the pillar, and there was the dragon, his ugly purple head shining in the sun, and his ugly purple mouth half open.
uncle james said: "good morning, sir. we have brought you a small present for your birthday. we do not like to let such an anniversary go by without some suitable testimonial, especially to one who is a stranger in our midst. our means are small, but our hearts are large. we have but one princess, but we give her freely do we not, my child?"
the princess said she supposed so, and the dragon came a little nearer.
suddenly a voice cried: "run!" and there was tom, and he had brought the zoological guinea pig and a pair of belgian hares with him. "just to see fair," said tom.
uncle james was furious. "what do you mean, sir," he cried, "by intruding on a state function with your common rabbits and things? go away, naughty little boy, and play with them somewhere else."
but while he was speaking the rabbits had come up one on each side of him, their great sides towering ever so high, and now they pressed him between them so that he was buried in their thick fur and almost choked.
the princess, meantime, had run to the other side of the pillar and was peeping around it to see what was going on. a crowd had followed the cab out of the town; now they reached the scene of the "state function" and they all cried out: "fair play play fair! we can't go back on our word like this. give a thing and take a thing? why, it's never done. let the poor exiled stranger dragon have his birthday present." and they tried to get at tom but the guinea pig stood in the way.
"yes," tom cried. "fair play is a jewel. and your helpless exile shall have the princess if he can catch her. now then, mary ann."
mary ann looked around the big pillar and called to the dragon: "bo! you can't catch me," and began to run as fast as ever she could, and the dragon ran after her. when the princess had run a half mile she stopped, dodged around a tree, and ran back to the pillar and around it, and the dragon after her. you see, he was so long he could not turn as quickly as she could. around and around the pillar ran the princess. the first time she ran around a long way from the pillar, and then nearer and nearer with the dragon after her all the time; and he was so busy trying to catch her that he never noticed that tom had tied the very end of his long, tight, whipcordy tail to the rock, so that the more the dragon ran around, the more times he twisted his tail around the pillar.
it was exactly like winding a top only the peg was the pillar, and the dragon's tail was the string. and the magician was safe between the belgian hares, and couldn't see anything but darkness, or do anything but choke.
when the dragon was wound onto the pillar as much as he possibly could be, and as tight like cotton on a reel the princess stopped running, and though she had very little breath left, she managed to say, "yah who's won now?"
this annoyed the dragon so much that he put out all his strength spread his great purple wings, and tried to fly at her. of course this pulled his tail, and pulled it very hard, so hard that as he pulled the tail had to come, and the pillar had to come around with the tail, and the island had to come around with the pillar, and in another minute the tail was loose, and the island was spinning around exactly like a top. it spun so fast that everyone fell flat on their faces and held on tight to themselves, because they felt something was going to happen.
all but the magician, who was choking between the belgian hares, and felt nothing but fur and fury.
and something did happen. the dragon had sent the kingdom of rotundia spinning the way it ought to have gone at the beginning of the world, and as it spun around, all the animals began to change sizes. the guinea pigs got small, and the elephants got big, and the men and women and children would have changed sizes too, if they had not had the sense to hold on to themselves, very tight indeed, with both hands; which, of course, the animals could not be expected to know how to do. and the best of it was that when the small beasts got big and the big beasts got small the dragon got small too, and fell at the princess's feet a little, crawling, purple newt with wings.
"funny little thing," said the princess, when she saw it. "i will take it for a birthday present."
but while all the people were still on their faces, holding on tight to themselves, uncle james, the magician, never thought of holding tight he only thought of how to punish belgian hares and the sons of gardeners; so when the big beasts grew small, he grew small with the other beasts, and the little purple dragon, when he fell at the princess's feet, saw there a very small magician named uncle james. and the dragon took him because it wanted a birthday present.
so now all the animals were new sizes and at first it seemed very strange to everyone to have great lumbering elephants and a tiny little dormouse, but they have gotten used to it now, and think no more of it than we do.
all this happened several years ago, and the other day i saw in the rotundia times an account of the wedding of the princess with lord thomas gardener, k.c.d., and i knew she could not have married anyone but tom, so i suppose they made him a lord on purpose for the wedding and k.c.d., of course, means clever conqueror of the dragon.
if you think that is wrong it is only because you don't know how they spell in rotundia. the paper said that among the beautiful presents of the bridegroom to the bride was an enormous elephant, on which the bridal pair made their wedding tour. this must have been fido. you remember tom promised to give him back to the princess when they were married. the rotundia times called the married couple "the happy pair." it was clever of the paper to think of calling them that it is such a pretty and novel expression, and i think it is truer than many of the things you see in papers.
because, you see, the princess and the gardener's son were so fond of each other they could not help being happy and besides, they had an elephant of their very own to ride on. if that is not enough to make people happy, i should like to know what is. though, of course, i know there are some people who could not be happy unless they had a whale to sail on, and perhaps not even then. but they are greedy, grasping people, the kind who would take four helps of pudding, as likely as not, which neither tom nor mary ann ever did.
iii. the deliverers of their country
it all began with effie's getting something in her eye. it hurt very much indeed, and it felt something like a red-hot spark only it seemed to have legs as well, and wings like a fly. effie rubbed and cried not real crying, but the kind your eye does all by itself without your being miserable inside your mind and then she went to her father to have the thing in her eye taken out. effie's father was a doctor, so of course he knew how to take things out of eyes he did it very cleverly with a soft paintbrush dipped in castor oil.
when he had gotten the thing out, he said: "this is very curious." effie had often got things in her eye before, and her father had always seemed to think it was natural rather tiresome and naughty perhaps, but still natural. he had never before thought it curious.
effie stood holding her handkerchief to her eye, and said: "i don't believe it's out." people always say this when they have had something in their eyes.
"oh, yes it's out," said the doctor. "here it is, on the brush. this is very interesting."
effie had never heard her father say that about anything that she had any share in. she said: "what?"
the doctor carried the brush very carefully across the room, and held the point of it under his microscope then he twisted the brass screws of the microscope, and looked through the top with one eye.
"dear me," he said. "dear, dear me! four well-developed limbs; a long caudal appendage; five toes, unequal in lengths, almost like one of the lacertidae, yet there are traces of wings." the creature under his eye wriggled a little in the castor oil, and he went on: "yes; a batlike wing. a new specimen, undoubtedly. effie, run round to the professor and ask him to be kind enough to step in for a few minutes."
"you might give me sixpence, daddy," said effie, "because i did bring you the new specimen. i took great care of it inside my eye, and my eye does hurt."
the doctor was so pleased with the new specimen that he gave effie a shilling, and presently the professor stepped round. he stayed to lunch, and he and the doctor quarreled very happily all the afternoon about the name and the family of the thing that had come out of effie's eye.
but at teatime another thing happened. effie's brother harry fished something out of his tea, which he thought at first was an earwig. he was just getting ready to drop it on the floor, and end its life in the usual way, when it shook itself in the spoon spread two wet wings, and flopped onto the tablecloth. there it sat, stroking itself with its feet and stretching its wings, and harry said: "why, it's a tiny newt!"
the professor leaned forward before the doctor could say a word. "i'll give you half a crown for it, harry, my lad," he said, speaking very fast; and then he picked it up carefully on his handkerchief.
"it is a new specimen," he said, "and finer than yours, doctor."
it was a tiny lizard, about half an inch long with scales and wings.
so now the doctor and the professor each had a specimen, and they were both very pleased. but before long these specimens began to seem less valuable. for the next morning, when the knife-boy was cleaning the doctor's boots, he suddenly dropped the brushes and the boot and the blacking, and screamed out that he was burnt.
and from inside the boot came crawling a lizard as big as a kitten, with large, shiny wings.
"why," said effie, "i know what it is. it is a dragon like the one st.
george killed."
and effie was right. that afternoon towser was bitten in the garden by a dragon about the size of a rabbit, which he had tried to chase, and the next morning all the papers were full of the wonderful "winged lizards"
that were appearing all over the country. the papers would not call them dragons, because, of course, no one believes in dragons nowadays and at any rate the papers were not going to be so silly as to believe in fairy stories. at first there were only a few, but in a week or two the country was simply running alive with dragons of all sizes, and in the air you could sometimes see them as thick as a swarm of bees. they all looked alike except as to size. they were green with scales, and they had four legs and a long tail and great wings like bats' wings, only the wings were a pale, half-transparent yellow, like the gear-boxes on bicycles.
they breathed fire and smoke, as all proper dragons must, but still the newspapers went on pretending they were lizards, until the editor of the standard was picked up and carried away by a very large one, and then the other newspaper people had not anyone left to tell them what they ought not to believe. so when the largest elephant in the zoo was carried off by a dragon, the papers gave up pretending and put alarming plague of dragons at the top of the paper.
you have no idea how alarming it was, and at the same time how aggravating. the large-size dragons were terrible certainly, but when once you had found out that the dragons always went to bed early because they were afraid of the chill night air, you had only to stay indoors all day, and you were pretty safe from the big ones. but the smaller sizes were a perfect nuisance. the ones as big as earwigs got in the soap, and they got in the butter. the ones as big as dogs got in the bath, and the fire and smoke inside them made them steam like anything when the cold water tap was turned on, so that careless people were often scalded quite severely. the ones that were as large as pigeons would get into workbaskets or corner drawers and bite you when you were in a hurry to get a needle or a handkerchief. the ones as big as sheep were easier to avoid, because you could see them coming; but when they flew in at the windows and curled up under your eiderdown, and you did not find them till you went to bed, it was always a shock. the ones this size did not eat people, only lettuce, but they always scorched the sheets and pillowcases dreadfully.
of course, the county council and the police did everything that could be done: it was no use offering the hand of the princess to anyone who killed a dragon. this way was all very well in olden times when there was only one dragon and one princess; but now there were far more dragons than princesses although the royal family was a large one. and besides, it would have been a mere waste of princesses to offer rewards for killing dragons, because everybody killed as many dragons as they could quite out of their own heads and without rewards at all, just to get the nasty things out of the way. the county council undertook to cremate all dragons delivered at their offices between the hours of ten and two, and whole wagonloads and cartloads and truckloads of dead dragons could be seen any day of the week standing in a long line in the street where the county council had their offices. boys brought barrowloads of dead dragons, and children on their way home from morning school would call in to leave the handful or two of little dragons they had brought in their satchels, or carried in their knotted pocket handkerchiefs. and yet there seemed to be as many dragons as ever. then the police stuck up great wood and canvas towers covered with patent glue. when the dragons flew against these towers, they stuck fast, as flies and wasps do on the sticky papers in the kitchen; and when the towers were covered all over with dragons, the police inspector used to set fire to the towers, and burnt them and dragons and all.
and yet there seemed to be more dragons than ever. the shops were full of patent dragon poison and anti-dragon soap, and dragonproof curtains for the windows; and indeed, everything that could be done was done.
and yet there seemed to be more dragons than ever.
it was not very easy to know what would poison a dragon, because, you see, they ate such different things. the largest kind ate elephants as long as there were any, and then went on with horses and cows. another size ate nothing but lilies of the valley, and a third size ate only prime ministers if they were to be had, and, if not, would feed freely on servants in livery. another size lived on bricks, and three of them ate two thirds of the south lambeth infirmary in one afternoon.
but the size effie was most afraid of was about as big as your dining room, and that size ate little girls and boys.
at first effie and her brother were quite pleased with the change in their lives. it was so amusing to sit up all night instead of going to sleep, and to play in the garden lighted by electric lamps. and it sounded so funny to hear mother say, when they were going to bed: "good night, my darlings, sleep sound all day, and don't get up too soon. you must not get up before it's quite dark. you wouldn't like the nasty dragons to catch you."
but after a time they got very tired of it all: they wanted to see the flowers and trees growing in the fields, and to see the pretty sunshine out of doors, and not just through glass windows and patent dragonproof curtains. and they wanted to play on the grass, which they were not allowed to do in the electric lamp-lighted garden because of the night-dew.
and they wanted so much to get out, just for once, in the beautiful, bright, dangerous daylight, that they began to try and think of some reason why they ought to go out. only they did not like to disobey their mother.
but one morning their mother was busy preparing some new dragon poison to lay down in the cellars, and their father was bandaging the hand of the boot boy, which had been scratched by one of the dragons who liked to eat prime ministers when they were to be had, so nobody remembered to say to the children: "don't get up till it is quite dark!"
"go now," said harry. "it would not be disobedient to go. and i know exactly what we ought to do, but i don't know how we ought to do it."
"what ought we to do?" said effie.
"we ought to wake st. george, of course," said harry. "he was the only person in his town who knew how to manage dragons; the people in the fairy tales don't count. but st. george is a real person, and he is only asleep, and he is waiting to be waked up. only nobody believes in st.
george now. i heard father say so."
"we do," said effie.
"of course we do. and don't you see, ef, that's the very reason why we could wake him? you can't wake people if you don't believe in them, can you?"
effie said no, but where could they find st. george?
"we must go and look," said harry boldly. "you shall wear a dragonproof frock, made of stuff like the curtains. and i will smear myself all over with the best dragon poison, and "
effie clasped her hands and skipped with joy and cried: "oh, harry! i know where we can find st. george! in st. george's church, of course."
"um," said harry, wishing he had thought of it for himself, "you have a little sense sometimes, for a girl."
so the next afternoon, quite early, long before the beams of sunset announced the coming night, when everybody would be up and working, the two children got out of bed. effie wrapped herself in a shawl of dragonproof muslin there was no time to make the frock and harry made a horrid mess of himself with the patent dragon poison. it was warranted harmless to infants and invalids, so he felt quite safe.
then they joined hands and set out to walk to st. george's church. as you know, there are many st. george's churches, but fortunately they took the turning that leads to the right one, and went along in the bright sunlight, feeling very brave and adventurous.
there was no one about in the streets except dragons, and the place was simply swarming with them. fortunately none of the dragons were just the right size for eating little boys and girls, or perhaps this story might have had to end here. there were dragons on the pavement, and dragons on the roadway, dragons basking on the front doorsteps of public buildings, and dragons preening their wings on the roofs in the hot afternoon sun.
the town was quite green with them. even when the children had gotten out of the town and were walking in the lanes, they noticed that the fields on each side were greener than usual with the scaly legs and tails; and some of the smaller sizes had made themselves asbestos nests in the flowering hawthorn hedges.
effie held her brother's hand very tight, and once when a fat dragon flopped against her ear she screamed out, and a whole flight of green dragons rose from the field at the sound, and sprawled away across the sky. the children could hear the rattle of their wings as they flew.
"oh, i want to go home," said effie.
"don't be silly," said harry. "surely you haven't forgotten about the seven champions and all the princes. people who are going to be their country's deliverers never scream and say they want to go home."
"and are we," asked effie "deliverers, i mean?"
"you'll see," said her brother, and on they went.
when they came to st. george's church they found the door open, and they walked right in but st. george was not there, so they walked around the churchyard outside, and presently they found the great stone tomb of st.
george, with the figure of him carved in marble outside, in his armor and helmet, and with his hands folded on his breast.
"how ever can we wake him?" they said. then harry spoke to st.
george but he would not answer; and he called, but st. george did not seem to hear; and then he actually tried to waken the great dragon-slayer by shaking his marble shoulders. but st. george took no notice.
then effie began to cry, and she put her arms around st. george's neck as well as she could for the marble, which was very much in the way at the back, and she kissed the marble face, and she said: "oh, dear, good, kind st. george, please wake up and help us."
and at that st. george opened his eyes sleepily, and stretched himself and said: "what's the matter, little girl?"
so the children told him all about it; he turned over in his marble and leaned on one elbow to listen. but when he heard that there were so many dragons he shook his head.
"it's no good," he said, "they would be one too many for poor old george. you should have waked me before. i was always for a fair fight one man one dragon, was my motto."
just then a flight of dragons passed overhead, and st. george half drew his sword.
but he shook his head again and pushed the sword back as the flight of dragons grew small in the distance.
"i can't do anything," he said. "things have changed since my time. st.
andrew told me about it. they woke him up over the engineers' strike, and he came to talk to me. he says everything is done by machinery now; there must be some way of settling these dragons. by the way, what sort of weather have you been having lately?"
this seemed so careless and unkind that harry would not answer, but effie said patiently, "it has been very fine. father says it is the hottest weather there has ever been in this country."
"ah, i guessed as much," said the champion, thoughtfully. "well, the only thing would be ... dragons can't stand wet and cold, that's the only thing. if you could find the taps."
st. george was beginning to settle down again on his stone slab.
"good night, very sorry i can't help you," he said, yawning behind his marble hand.
"oh, but you can," cried effie. "tell us what taps?"
"oh, like in the bathroom," said st. george, still more sleepily. "and there's a looking glass, too; shows you all the world and what's going on. st. denis told me about it; said it was a very pretty thing. i'm sorry i can't good night."
and he fell back into his marble and was fast asleep again in a moment.
"we shall never find the taps," said harry. "i say, wouldn't it be awful if st. george woke up when there was a dragon near, the size that eats champions?"
effie pulled off her dragonproof veil. "we didn't meet any the size of the dining room as we came along," she said. "i daresay we shall be quite safe."
so she covered st. george with the veil, and harry rubbed off as much as he could of the dragon poison onto st. george's armor, so as to make everything quite safe for him.
"we might hide in the church till it is dark," he said, "and then "
but at that moment a dark shadow fell on them, and they saw that it was a dragon exactly the size of the dining room at home.
so then they knew that all was lost. the dragon swooped down and caught the two children in his claws; he caught effie by her green silk sash, and harry by the little point at the back of his eton jacket and then, spreading his great yellow wings, he rose into the air, rattling like a third-class carriage when the brake is hard on.
"oh, harry," said effie, "i wonder when he will eat us!" the dragon was flying across woods and fields with great flaps of his wings that carried him a quarter of a mile at each flap.
harry and effie could see the country below, hedges and rivers and churches and farmhouses flowing away from under them, much faster than you see them running away from the sides of the fastest express train.
and still the dragon flew on. the children saw other dragons in the air as they went, but the dragon who was as big as the dining room never stopped to speak to any of them, but just flew on quite steadily.
"he knows where he wants to go," said harry. "oh, if he would only drop us before he gets there!"
but the dragon held on tight, and he flew and flew and flew until at last, when the children were quite giddy, he settled down, with a rattling of all his scales, on the top of a mountain. and he lay there on his great green scaly side, panting, and very much out of breath, because he had come such a long way. but his claws were fast in effie's sash and the little point at the back of harry's eton jacket.
then effie took out the knife harry had given her on her birthday. it had cost only sixpence to begin with, and she had had it a month, and it never could sharpen anything but slate-pencils; but somehow she managed to make that knife cut her sash in front, and crept out of it, leaving the dragon with only a green silk bow in one of his claws. that knife would never have cut harry's jacket-tail off, though, and when effie had tried for some time she saw that this was so and gave it up. but with her help harry managed to wriggle quietly out of his sleeves, so that the dragon had only an eton jacket in his other claw. then the children crept on tiptoe to a crack in the rocks and got in. it was much too narrow for the dragon to get in also, so they stayed in there and waited to make faces at the dragon when he felt rested enough to sit up and begin to think about eating them. he was very angry, indeed, when they made faces at him, and blew out fire and smoke at them, but they ran farther into the cave so that he could not reach them, and when he was tired of blowing he went away.
but they were afraid to come out of the cave, so they went farther in, and presently the cave opened out and grew bigger, and the floor was soft sand, and when they had come to the very end of the cave there was a door, and on it was written: universal taproom. private. no one allowed inside.
so they opened the door at once just to peep in, and then they remembered what st. george had said.
"we can't be worse off than we are," said harry, "with a dragon waiting for us outside. let's go in."
they went boldly into the taproom, and shut the door behind them.
and now they were in a sort of room cut out of the solid rock, and all along one side of the room were taps, and all the taps were labeled with china labels like you see in baths. and as they could both read words of two syllables or even three sometimes, they understood at once that they had gotten to the place where the weather is turned on from. there were six big taps labeled "sunshine," "wind," "rain," "snow," "hail," "ice,"
and a lot of little ones, labeled "fair to moderate," "showery," "south breeze," "nice growing weather for the crops," "skating," "good open weather," "south wind," "east wind," and so on. and the big tap labeled "sunshine" was turned full on. they could not see any sunshine the cave was lighted by a skylight of blue glass so they supposed the sunlight was pouring out by some other way, as it does with the tap that washes out the underneath parts of patent sinks in kitchens.
then they saw that one side of the room was just a big looking glass, and when you looked in it you could see everything that was going on in the world and all at once, too, which is not like most looking glasses.
they saw the carts delivering the dead dragons at the county council offices, and they saw st. george asleep under the dragonproof veil. and they saw their mother at home crying because her children had gone out in the dreadful, dangerous daylight, and she was afraid a dragon had eaten them. and they saw the whole of england, like a great puzzle map green in the field parts and brown in the towns, and black in the places where they make coal and crockery and cutlery and chemicals. all over it, on the black parts, and on the brown, and on the green, there was a network of green dragons. and they could see that it was still broad daylight, and no dragons had gone to bed yet.
effie said, "dragons do not like cold." and she tried to turn off the sunshine, but the tap was out of order, and that was why there had been so much hot weather, and why the dragons had been able to be hatched. so they left the sunshine tap alone, and they turned on the snow and left the tap full on while they went to look in the glass. there they saw the dragons running all sorts of ways like ants if you are cruel enough to pour water into an ant-heap, which, of course, you never are. and the snow fell more and more.
then effie turned the rain tap quite full on, and presently the dragons began to wriggle less, and by-and-by some of them lay quite still, so the children knew the water had put out the fires inside them, and they were dead. so then they turned on the hail only half on, for fear of breaking people's windows and after a while there were no more dragons to be seen moving.
then the children knew that they were indeed the deliverers of their country.
"they will put up a monument to us," said harry, "as high as nelson's!
all the dragons are dead."
"i hope the one that was waiting outside for us is dead!" said effie.
"and about the monument, harry, i'm not so sure. what can they do with such a lot of dead dragons? it would take years and years to bury them, and they could never be burnt now they are so soaking wet. i wish the rain would wash them off into the sea."
but this did not happen, and the children began to feel that they had not been so frightfully clever after all.
"i wonder what this old thing's for," said harry. he had found a rusty old tap, which seemed as though it had not been used for ages. its china label was quite coated over with dirt and cobwebs. when effie had cleaned it with a bit of her skirt for curiously enough both the children had come out without pocket handkerchiefs she found that the label said "waste."
"let's turn it on," she said. "it might carry off the dragons."
the tap was very stiff from not having been used for such a long time, but together they managed to turn it on, and then ran to the mirror to see what happened.
already a great, round black hole had opened in the very middle of the map of england, and the sides of the map were tilting themselves up, so that the rain ran down toward the hole.
"oh, hurrah, hurrah, hurrah!" cried effie, and she hurried back to the taps and turned on everything that seemed wet. "showery," "good open weather," "nice growing weather for the crops," and even "south" and "south-west," because she had heard her father say that those winds brought rain.
and now the floods of rain were pouring down on the country, and great sheets of water flowed toward the center of the map, and cataracts of water poured into the great round hole in the middle of the map, and the dragons were being washed away and disappearing down the waste pipe in great green masses and scattered green shoals single dragons and dragons by the dozen; of all sizes, from the ones that carry off elephants down to the ones that get in your tea.
presently there was not a dragon left. so then they turned off the tap named "waste," and they half-turned off the one labeled "sunshine" it was broken, so that they could not turn it off altogether and they turned on "fair to moderate" and "showery" and both taps stuck, so that they could not be turned off, which accounts for our climate.
how did they get home again? by the snowdon railway of course.
and was the nation grateful? well the nation was very wet. and by the time the nation had gotten dry again it was interested in the new invention for toasting muffins by electricity, and all the dragons were almost forgotten. dragons do not seem so important when they are dead and gone, and, you know, there never was a reward offered.
and what did father and mother say when effie and harry got home?
my dear, that is the sort of silly question you children always will ask. however, just for this once i don't mind telling you.
mother said: "oh, my darlings, my darlings, you're safe you're safe!
you naughty children how could you be so disobedient? go to bed at once!"
and their father the doctor said: "i wish i had known what you were going to do! i should have liked to preserve a specimen. i threw away the one i got out of effie's eye. i intended to get a more perfect specimen. i did not anticipate this immediate extinction of the species."
the professor said nothing, but he rubbed his hands. he had kept his specimen the one the size of an earwig that he gave harry half a crown for and he has it to this day.
you must get him to show it to you!
iv. the ice dragon, or do as you are told
this is the tale of the wonders that befell on the evening of the eleventh of december, when they did what they were told not to do. you may think that you know all the unpleasant things that could possibly happen to you if you are disobedient, but there are some things which even you do not know, and they did not know them either.
their names were george and jane.
there were no fireworks that year on guy fawkes' day, because the heir to the throne was not well. he was cutting his first tooth, and that is a very anxious time for any person even for a royal one. he was really very poorly, so that fireworks would have been in the worst possible taste, even at land's end or in the isle of man, whilst in forest hill, which was the home of jane and george, anything of the kind was quite out of the question. even the crystal palace, empty-headed as it is, felt that this was no time for catherine-wheels.
but when the prince had cut his tooth, rejoicings were not only admissible but correct, and the eleventh of december was proclaimed firework day. all the people were most anxious to show their loyalty, and to enjoy themselves at the same time. so there were fireworks and torchlight processions, and set pieces at the crystal palace, with "blessings on our prince" and "long live our royal darling" in different-colored fires; and the most private of boarding schools had a half holiday; and even the children of plumbers and authors had tuppence each given them to spend as they liked.
george and jane had sixpence each and they spent the whole amount on a golden rain, which would not light for ever so long, and when it did light went out almost at once, so they had to look at the fireworks in the gardens next door, and at the ones at the crystal palace, which were very glorious indeed.
all their relations had colds in their heads, so jane and george were allowed to go out into the garden alone to let off their firework. jane had put on her fur cape and her thick gloves, and her hood with the silver fox fur on it that was made out of mother's old muff; and george had his overcoat with the three capes, and his comforter, and father's sealskin traveling cap with the pieces that come down over your ears.
it was dark in the garden, but the fireworks all about made it seem very gay, and though the children were cold they were quite sure that they were enjoying themselves.
they got up on the fence at the end of the garden to see better; and then they saw, very far away, where the edge of the dark world is, a shining line of straight, beautiful lights arranged in a row, as if they were the spears carried by a fairy army.
"oh, how pretty," said jane. "i wonder what they are. it looks as if the fairies were planting little shining baby poplar trees and watering them with liquid light."
"liquid fiddlestick!" said george. he had been to school, so he knew that these were only the aurora borealis, or northern lights. and he said so.
"but what is the rory bory what's-its-name?" asked jane. "who lights it, and what's it there for?"
george had to own that he had not learned that.
"but i know," said he, "that it has something to do with the great bear, and the dipper, and the plough, and charles's wain."
"and what are they?" asked jane.
"oh, they're the surnames of some of the star families. there goes a jolly rocket," answered george, and jane felt as if she almost understood about the star families.
the fairy spears of light twinkled and gleamed: they were much prettier than the big, blaring, blazing bonfire that was smoking and flaming and spluttering in the next-door-but-one garden prettier even than the colored fires at the crystal palace.
"i wish we could see them nearer," jane said. "i wonder if the star families are nice families the kind that mother would like us to go to tea with, if we were little stars?"
"they aren't that sort of families at all, silly," said her brother, kindly trying to explain. "i only said 'families' because a kid like you wouldn't have understood if i'd said constel ... and, besides, i've forgotten the end of the word. anyway, the stars are all up in the sky, so you can't go to tea with them."
"no," said jane. "i said if we were little stars."
"but we aren't," said george.
"no," said jane, with a sigh. "i know that. i'm not so stupid as you think, george. but the tory bories are somewhere at the edge. couldn't we go and see them?"
"considering you're eight, you haven't much sense." george kicked his boots against the fencing to warm his toes. "it's half the world away."
"it looks very near," said jane, hunching up her shoulders to keep her neck warm.
"they're close to the north pole," said george. "look here i don't care a straw about the aurora borealis, but i shouldn't mind discovering the north pole: it's awfully difficult and dangerous, and then you come home and write a book about it with a lot of pictures, and everybody says how brave you are."
jane got off the fence.
"oh, george, let's," she said. "we shall never have such a chance again all alone by ourselves and quite late, too."
"i'd go right enough if it wasn't for you," george answered gloomily, "but you know they always say i lead you into mischief and if we went to the north pole we should get our boots wet, as likely as not, and you remember what they said about not going on the grass."
"they said the lawn," said jane. "we're not going on the lawn. oh, george, do, do let's. it doesn't look so very far we could be back before they had time to get dreadfully angry."
"all right," said george, "but mind, i don't want to go."
so off they went. they got over the fence, which was very cold and white and shiny because it was beginning to freeze, and on the other side of the fence was somebody else's garden, so they got out of that as quickly as they could, and beyond that was a field where there was another big bonfire, with people standing around it who looked quite dark-skinned.
"it's like indians," said george, and wanted to stop and look, but jane pulled him on, and they passed by the bonfire and got through a gap in the hedge into another field a dark one; and far away, beyond quite a number of other dark fields, the northern lights shone and sparkled and twinkled.
now, during the winter the arctic regions come much farther south than they are marked on the map. very few people know this, though you would think they could tell it by the ice in the jugs of a morning. and just when george and jane were starting for the north pole, the arctic regions had come down very nearly as far as forest hill, so that, as the children walked on, it grew colder and colder, and presently they saw that the fields were covered with snow, and there were great icicles hanging from all the hedges and gates. and the northern lights still seemed some way off.
they were crossing a very rough, snowy field when jane first noticed the animals. there were white rabbits and white hares and all sorts and sizes of white birds, and some larger creatures in the shadows of the hedges that jane was sure were wolves and bears.
"polar bears and arctic wolves, of course i mean," she said, for she did not want george to think her stupid again.
there was a great hedge at the end of this field, all covered with snow and icicles; but the children found a place where there was a hole, and as no bears or wolves seemed to be just in that part of the hedge, they crept through and scrambled out of the frozen ditch on the other side.
and then they stood still and held their breath with wonder.
for in front of them, running straight and smooth right away to the northern lights, lay a great wide road of pure dark ice, and on each side were tall trees all sparkling with white frost, and from the boughs of the trees hung strings of stars threaded on fine moonbeams, and shining so brightly that it was like a beautiful fairy daylight. jane said so; but george said it was like the electric lights at the earl's court exhibition.
the rows of trees went as straight as ruled lines away away and away and at the other end of them shone the aurora borealis.
there was a signpost of silvery snow, and on it in letters of pure ice the children read: this way to the north pole.
then george said: "way or no way, i know a slide when i see one so here goes." and he took a run on the frozen snow, and jane took a run when she saw him do it, and the next moment they were sliding away, each with feet half a yard apart, along the great slide that leads to the north pole.
this great slide is made for the convenience of the polar bears, who, during the winter months, get their food from the army and navy stores and it is the most perfect slide in the world. if you have never come across it, it is because you have never let off fireworks on the eleventh of december, and have never been thoroughly naughty and disobedient. but do not be these things in the hope of finding the great slide because you might find something quite different, and then you will be sorry.
the great slide is like common slides in that when once you have started you have to go on to the end unless you fall down and then it hurts just as much as the smaller kind on ponds. the great slide runs downhill all the way, so that you keep on going faster and faster and faster. george and jane went so fast that they had not time to notice the scenery. they only saw the long lines of frosted trees and the starry lamps, and on each side, rushing back as they slid on, a very broad, white world and a very large, black night; and overhead as well as in the trees the stars were bright like silver lamps, and far ahead shone and trembled and sparkled the line of fairy spears. jane said that, and george said: "i can see the northern lights quite plain."
it is very pleasant to slide and slide and slide on clear, dark ice especially if you feel you are really going somewhere, and more especially if that somewhere is the north pole. the children's feet made no noise on the ice, and they went on and on in a beautiful white silence. but suddenly the silence was shattered and a cry rang out over the snow.
"hey! you there! stop!"
"tumble for your life!" cried george, and he fell down at once, because it is the only way to stop. jane fell on top of him and then they crawled on hands and knees to the snow at the edge of the slide and there was a sportsman, dressed in a peaked cap and a frozen moustache, like the one you see in the pictures about ice-peter, and he had a gun in his hand.
"you don't happen to have any bullets about you?" said he.
"no," george said, truthfully. "i had five of father's revolver cartridges, but they were taken away the day nurse turned out my pockets to see if i had taken the knob of the bathroom door by mistake."
"quite so," said the sportsman, "these accidents will occur. you don't carry firearms, then, i presume?"
"i haven't any firearms," said george, "but i have a firework. it's only a squib one of the boys gave me, if that's any good." and he began to feel among the string and peppermints, and buttons and tops and nibs and chalk and foreign postage stamps in his knickerbocker pockets.
"one could but try," the sportsman replied, and he held out his hand.
but jane pulled at her brother's jacket-tail and whispered, "ask him what he wants it for."
so then the sportsman had to confess that he wanted the firework to kill the white grouse with; and, when they came to look, there was the white grouse himself, sitting in the snow, looking quite pale and careworn, and waiting anxiously for the matter to be decided one way or the other.
george put all the things back in his pockets, and said, "no, i shan't.
the reason for shooting him stopped yesterday i heard father say so so it wouldn't be fair, anyhow. i'm very sorry; but i can't so there!"
the sportsman said nothing, only he shook his fist at jane, and then he got on the slide and tried to go toward the crystal palace which was not easy, because that way is uphill. so they left him trying, and went on.
before they started, the white grouse thanked them in a few pleasant, well-chosen words, and then they took a sideways slanting run and started off again on the great slide, and so away toward the north pole and the twinkling, beautiful lights.
the great slide went on and on, and the lights did not seem to come much nearer, and the white silence wrapped around them as they slid along the wide, icy path. then once again the silence was broken to bits by someone calling: "hey! you there! stop!"
"tumble for your life!" cried george, and tumbled as before, stopping in the only possible way, and jane stopped on top of him, and they crawled to the edge and came suddenly on a butterfly collector, who was looking for specimens with a pair of blue glasses and a blue net and a blue book with colored plates.
"excuse me," said the collector, "but have you such a thing as a needle about you a very long needle?"
"i have a needle book," replied jane, politely, "but there aren't any needles in it now. george took them all to do the things with pieces of cork in the 'boy's own scientific experimenter' and 'the young mechanic.' he did not do the things, but he did for the needles."
"curiously enough," said the collector, "i too wish to use the needle in connection with cork."
"i have a hatpin in my hood," said jane. "i fastened the fur with it when it caught in the nail on the greenhouse door. it is very long and sharp would that do?"
"one could but try," said the collector, and jane began to feel for the pin. but george pinched her arm and whispered, "ask what he wants it for." then the collector had to own that he wanted the pin to stick through the great arctic moth, "a magnificent specimen," he added, "which i am most anxious to preserve."
and there, sure enough, in the collector's butterfly net sat the great arctic moth, listening attentively to the conversation.
"oh, i couldn't!" cried jane. and while george was explaining to the collector that they would really rather not, jane opened the blue folds of the butterfly net, and asked the moth quietly if it would please step outside for a moment. and it did.
when the collector saw that the moth was free, he seemed less angry than grieved.
"well, well," said he, "here's a whole arctic expedition thrown away! i shall have to go home and fit out another. and that means a lot of writing to the papers and things. you seem to be a singularly thoughtless little girl."
so they went on, leaving him too, trying to go uphill towards the crystal palace.
when the great white arctic moth had returned thanks in a suitable speech, george and jane took a sideways slanting run and started sliding again, between the star-lamps along the great slide toward the north pole. they went faster and faster, and the lights ahead grew brighter and brighter so that they could not keep their eyes open, but had to blink and wink as they went and then suddenly the great slide ended in an immense heap of snow, and george and jane shot right into it because they could not stop themselves, and the snow was soft, so that they went in up to their very ears.
when they had picked themselves out and thumped each other on the back to get rid of the snow, they shaded their eyes and looked, and there, right in front of them, was the wonder of wonders the north pole towering high and white and glistening, like an ice-lighthouse, and it was quite, quite close, so that you had to put your head as far back as it would go, and farther, before you could see the high top of it. it was made entirely of ice. you will hear grown-up people talk a great deal of nonsense about the north pole, and when you are grown up, it is even possible that you may talk nonsense about it yourself (the most unlikely things do happen) but deep down in your heart you must always remember that the north pole is made of clear ice, and could not possibly, if you come to think of it, be made of anything else.
all around the pole, making a bright ring about it, were hundreds of little fires, and the flames of them did not flicker and twist, but went up blue and green and rosy and straight like the stalks of dream lilies.
jane said so, but george said they were as straight as ramrods.
and these flames were the aurora borealis, which the children had seen as far away as forest hill.
the ground was quite flat, and covered with smooth, hard snow, which shone and sparkled like the top of a birthday cake that has been iced at home. the ones done at the shops do not shine and sparkle, because they mix flour with the icing sugar.
"it is like a dream," said jane.
and george said, "it is the north pole. just think of the fuss people always make about getting here and it was no trouble at all, really."
"i daresay lots of people have gotten here," said jane, dismally. "it's not the getting here i see that it's the getting back again.
perhaps no one will ever know that we have been here, and the robins will cover us with leaves and "
"nonsense," said george. "there aren't any robins, and there aren't any leaves. it's just the north pole, that's all, and i've found it; and now i shall try to climb up and plant the british flag on the top my handkerchief will do; and if it really is the north pole, my pocket compass uncle james gave me will spin around and around, and then i shall know. come on."
so jane came on; and when they got close to the clear, tall, beautiful flames they saw that there was a great, queer-shaped lump of ice all around the bottom of the pole clear, smooth, shining ice, that was deep, beautiful prussian blue, like icebergs, in the thick parts, and all sorts of wonderful, glimmery, shimmery, changing colors in the thin parts, like the cut-glass chandelier in grandmamma's house in london.
"it is a very curious shape," said jane. "it's almost like" she moved back a step to get a better view of it "it's almost like a dragon."
"it's much more like the lampposts on the thames embankment," said george, who had noticed a curly thing like a tail that went twisting up the north pole.
"oh, george," cried jane, "it is a dragon; i can see its wings.
whatever shall we do?"
and, sure enough, it was a dragon a great, shining, winged, scaly, clawy, big-mouthed dragon made of pure ice. it must have gone to sleep curled around the hole where the warm steam used to come up from the middle of the earth, and then when the earth got colder, and the column of steam froze and was turned into the north pole, the dragon must have got frozen in his sleep frozen too hard to move and there he stayed.
and though he was very terrible he was very beautiful too.
jane said so, but george said, "oh, don't bother; i'm thinking how to get onto the pole and try the compass without waking the brute."
the dragon certainly was beautiful, with his deep, clear prussian blueness, and his rainbow-colored glitter. and rising from within the cold coil of the frozen dragon the north pole shot up like a pillar made of one great diamond, and every now and then it cracked a little, from sheer cold. the sound of the cracking was the only thing that broke the great white silence in the midst of which the dragon lay like an enormous jewel, and the straight flames went up all around him like the stalks of tall lilies.
and as the children stood there looking at the most wonderful sight their eyes had ever seen, there was a soft padding of feet and a hurry-scurry behind them, and from the outside darkness beyond the flame-stalks came a crowd of little brown creatures running, jumping, scrambling, tumbling head over heels and on all fours, and some even walking on their heads. they joined hands as they came near the fires and danced around in a ring.
"it's bears," said jane. "i know it is. oh, how i wish we hadn't come; and my boots are so wet."
the dancing-ring broke up suddenly, and the next moment hundreds of furry arms clutched at george and jane, and they found themselves in the middle of a great, soft, heaving crowd of little fat people in brown fur dresses, and the white silence was quite gone.
"bears, indeed," cried a shrill voice. "you'll wish we were bears before you've done with us."
this sounded so dreadful that jane began to cry. up to now the children had only seen the most beautiful and wondrous things, but now they began to be sorry they had done what they were told not to, and the difference between "lawn" and "grass" did not seem so great as it had at forest hill.
directly jane began to cry, all the brown people started back. no one cries in the arctic regions for fear of being struck by the frost. so that these people had never seen anyone cry before.
"don't cry for real," whispered george, "or you'll get chilblains in your eyes. but pretend to howl it frightens them."
so jane went on pretending to howl, and the real crying stopped: it always does when you begin to pretend. you try it.
then, speaking very loud so as to be heard over the howls of jane, george said: "yah who's afraid? we are george and jane who are you?"
"we are the sealskin dwarfs," said the brown people, twisting their furry bodies in and out of the crowd like the changing glass in kaleidoscopes. "we are very precious and expensive, for we are made, throughout, of the very best sealskin."
"and what are those fires for?" bellowed george for jane was crying louder and louder.
"those," shouted the dwarfs, coming a step nearer, "are the fires we make to thaw the dragon. he is frozen now so he sleeps curled up around the pole but when we have thawed him with our fires he will wake up and go and eat everybody in the world except us."
"whatever do you want him to do that for?" yelled george.
"oh just for spite," bawled the dwarfs carelessly as if they were saying, "just for fun."
jane stopped crying to say: "you are heartless."
"no, we aren't," they said. "our hearts are made of the finest sealskin, just like little fat sealskin purses "
and they all came a step nearer. they were very fat and round. their bodies were like sealskin jackets on a very stout person; their heads were like sealskin muffs; their legs were like sealskin boas; and their hands and feet were like sealskin tobacco pouches. and their faces were like seals' faces, inasmuch as they, too, were covered with sealskin.
"thank you so much for telling us," said george. "good evening. (keep on howling, jane!)"
but the dwarfs came a step nearer, muttering and whispering. then the muttering stopped and there was a silence so deep that jane was afraid to howl in it. but it was a brown silence, and she had liked the white silence better.
then the chief dwarf came quite close and said: "what's that on your head?"
and george felt it was all up for he knew it was his father's sealskin cap.
the dwarf did not wait for an answer. "it's made of one of us," he screamed, "or else one of the seals, our poor relations. boy, now your fate is sealed!"
looking at the wicked seal-faces all around them, george and jane felt that their fate was sealed indeed.
the dwarfs seized the children in their furry arms. george kicked, but it is no use kicking sealskin, and jane howled, but the dwarfs were getting used to that. they climbed up the dragon's side and dumped the children down on his icy spine, with their backs against the north pole.
you have no idea how cold it was the kind of cold that makes you feel small and prickly inside your clothes, and makes you wish you had twenty times as many clothes to feel small and prickly inside of.
the sealskin dwarfs tied george and jane to the north pole, and, as they had no ropes, they bound them with snow-wreaths, which are very strong when they are made in the proper way, and they heaped up the fires very close and said: "now the dragon will get warm, and when he gets warm he will wake, and when he wakes he will be hungry, and when he is hungry he will begin to eat, and the first thing he will eat will be you."
the little, sharp, many-colored flames sprang up like the stalks of dream lilies, but no heat came to the children, and they grew colder and colder.
"we shan't be very nice when the dragon does eat us, that's one comfort," said george. "we shall be turned into ice long before that."
suddenly there was a flapping of wings, and the white grouse perched on the dragon's head and said: "can i be of any assistance?"
now, by this time the children were so cold, so cold, so very, very cold, that they had forgotten everything but that, and they could say nothing else. so the white grouse said: "one moment. i am only too grateful for this opportunity of showing my sense of your manly conduct about the firework!"
and the next moment there was a soft whispering rustle of wings overhead, and then, fluttering slowly, softly down, came hundreds and thousands of little white fluffy feathers. they fell on george and jane like snowflakes, and, like flakes of fallen snow lying one above another, they grew into a thicker and thicker covering, so that presently the children were buried under a heap of white feathers, and only their faces peeped out.
"oh, you dear, good, kind white grouse," said jane, "but you'll be cold yourself, won't you, now you have given us all your pretty dear feathers?"
the white grouse laughed, and his laugh was echoed by thousands of kind, soft bird voices.
"did you think all those feathers came out of one breast? there are hundreds and hundreds of us here, and every one of us can spare a little tuft of soft breast feathers to help to keep two kind little hearts warm!"
thus spoke the grouse, who certainly had very pretty manners.
so now the children snuggled under the feathers and were warm, and when the sealskin dwarfs tried to take the feathers away, the grouse and his friends flew in their faces with flappings and screams, and drove the dwarfs back. they are a cowardly folk.
the dragon had not moved yet but then he might at any moment get warm enough to move, and though george and jane were now warm they were not comfortable nor easy in their minds. they tried to explain to the grouse; but though he is polite, he is not clever, and he only said:
"you've got a warm nest, and we'll see that no one takes it from you.
what more can you possibly want?"
just then came a new, strange, jerky fluttering of wings far softer than the grouse's, and george and jane cried out together: "oh, do mind your wings in the fires!"
for they saw at once that it was the great white arctic moth.
"what's the matter?" he asked, settling on the dragon's tail.
so they told him.
"sealskin, are they?" said the moth. "just you wait a minute!"
he flew off very crookedly, dodging the flames, and presently he came back, and there were so many moths with him that it was as if a live sheet of white wingedness were suddenly drawn between the children and the stars.
and then the doom of the bad sealskin dwarfs fell suddenly on them.
for the great sheet of winged whiteness broke up and fell as snow falls, and it fell upon the sealskin dwarfs; and every snowflake of it was a live, fluttering, hungry moth that buried its greedy nose deep in the sealskin fur.
grown-up people will tell you that it is not moths but moths' children who eat fur but this is only when they are trying to deceive you. when they are not thinking about you they say, "i fear the moths have got at my ermine tippet," or, "your poor aunt emma had a lovely sable cloak, but it was eaten by moths." and now there were more moths than have ever been together in this world before, all settling on the sealskin dwarfs.
the dwarfs did not see their danger till it was too late. then they called for camphor and bitter apple and oil of lavender and yellow soap and borax; and some of the dwarfs even started to get these things, but long before any of them could get to the chemist's, all was over. the moths ate and ate and ate till the sealskin dwarfs, being sealskin throughout, even to the empty hearts of them, were eaten down to the very life and they fell one by one on the snow and so came to their end. and all around the north pole the snow was brown with their flat bare pelts.
"oh, thank you thank you, darling arctic moth," cried jane. "you are good i do hope you haven't eaten enough to disagree with you afterward!"
millions of moth voices answered, with laughter as soft as moth wings, "we should be a poor set of fellows if we couldn't over eat ourselves once in a while to oblige a friend."
and off they all fluttered, and the white grouse flew off, and the sealskin dwarfs were all dead, and the fires went out, and george and jane were left alone in the dark with the dragon!
"oh, dear," said jane, "this is the worst of all!"
"we've no friends left to help us," said george. he never thought that the dragon himself might help them but then that was an idea that would never have occurred to any boy.
it grew colder and colder and colder, and even under the grouse feathers the children shivered.
then, when it was so cold that it could not manage to be any colder without breaking the thermometer, it stopped. and then the dragon uncurled himself from around the north pole, and stretched his long, icy length over the snow, and said: "this is something like! how faint those fires did make me feel!"
the fact was, the sealskin dwarfs had gone the wrong way to work: the dragon had been frozen so long that now he was nothing but solid ice all through, and the fires only made him feel as if he were going to die.
but when the fires were out he felt quite well, and very hungry. he looked around for something to eat. but he never noticed george and jane, because they were frozen to his back.
he moved slowly off, and the snow-wreaths that bound the children to the pole gave way with a snap, and there was the dragon, crawling south with jane and george on his great, scaly, icy shining back. of course the dragon had to go south if he went anywhere, because when you get to the north pole there is no other way to go. the dragon rattled and tinkled as he went, exactly like the cut-glass chandelier when you touch it, as you are strictly forbidden to do. of course there are a million ways of going south from the north pole so you will own that it was lucky for george and jane when the dragon took the right way and suddenly got his heavy feet on the great slide. off he went, full speed, between the starry lamps, toward forest hill and the crystal palace.
"he's going to take us home," said jane. "oh, he is a good dragon. i am glad!"
george was rather glad too, though neither of the children felt at all sure of their welcome, especially as their feet were wet, and they were bringing a strange dragon home with them.
they went very fast, because dragons can go uphill as easily as down.
you would not understand why if i told you because you are only in long division at present; yet if you want me to tell you, so that you can show off to other children, i will. it is because dragons can get their tails into the fourth dimension and hold on there, and when you can do that everything else is easy.
the dragon went very fast, only stopping to eat the collector and the sportsman, who were still struggling to go up the slide vainly, because they had no tails, and had never even heard of the fourth dimension.
when the dragon got to the end of the slide he crawled very slowly across the dark field beyond the field where there was a bonfire, next to the next-door garden at forest hill.
he went slower and slower, and in the bonfire field he stopped altogether, and because the arctic regions had not got down so far as that, and because the bonfire was very hot, the dragon began to melt and melt and melt and before the children knew what he was doing they found themselves sitting in a large pool of water, and their boots were as wet as wet, and there was not a bit of dragon left!
so they went indoors.
of course some grown-up or other noticed at once that the boots of george and jane were wet and muddy, and that they had both been sitting down in a very damp place, so they were sent to bed immediately.
it was long past their time, anyhow.
now, if you are of an inquiring mind not at all a nice thing in a little child who reads fairy tales you will want to know how it is that since the sealskin dwarfs have all been killed, and the fires all been let out, the aurora borealis shines, on cold nights, as brightly as ever.
my dear, i do not know! i am not too proud to own that there are some things i know nothing about and this is one of them. but i do know that whoever has lighted those fires again, it is certainly not the sealskin dwarfs. they were all eaten by moths and motheaten things are of no use, even to light fires!
v. the island of the nine whirlpools
the dark arch that led to the witch's cave was hung with a black-and-yellow fringe of live snakes. as the queen went in, keeping carefully in the middle of the arch, all the snakes lifted their wicked, flat heads and stared at her with their wicked, yellow eyes. you know it is not good manners to stare, even at royalty, except of course for cats. and the snakes had been so badly brought up that they even put their tongues out at the poor lady. nasty, thin, sharp tongues they were too.
now, the queen's husband was, of course, the king. and besides being a king he was an enchanter, and considered to be quite at the top of his profession, so he was very wise, and he knew that when kings and queens want children, the queen always goes to see a witch. so he gave the queen the witch's address, and the queen called on her, though she was very frightened and did not like it at all. the witch was sitting by a fire of sticks, stirring something bubbly in a shiny copper cauldron.
"what do you want, my dear?" she said to the queen.
"oh, if you please," said the queen, "i want a baby a very nice one. we don't want any expense spared. my husband said "
"oh, yes," said the witch. "i know all about him. and so you want a child? do you know it will bring you sorrow?"
"it will bring me joy first," said the queen.
"great sorrow," said the witch.
"greater joy," said the queen.
then the witch said, "well, have your own way. i suppose it's as much as your place is worth to go back without it?"
"the king would be very much annoyed," said the poor queen.
"well, well," said the witch. "what will you give me for the child?"
"anything you ask for, and all i have," said the queen.
"then give me your gold crown."
the queen took it off quickly.
"and your necklace of blue sapphires."
the queen unfastened it.
"and your pearl bracelets."
the queen unclasped them.
"and your ruby clasps."
and the queen undid the clasps.
"now the lilies from your breast."
the queen gathered together the lilies.
"and the diamonds of your little bright shoe buckles."
the queen pulled off her shoes.
then the witch stirred the stuff that was in the cauldron, and, one by one, she threw in the gold crown and the sapphire necklace and the pearl bracelets and the ruby clasps and the diamonds of the little bright shoe buckles, and last of all she threw in the lilies.
the stuff in the cauldron boiled up in foaming flashes of yellow and blue and red and white and silver, and sent out a sweet scent, and presently the witch poured it out into a pot and set it to cool in the doorway among the snakes.
then she said to the queen: "your child will have hair as golden as your crown, eyes as blue as your sapphires. the red of your rubies will lie on its lips, and its skin will be clear and pale as your pearls. its soul will be white and sweet as your lilies, and your diamonds will be no clearer than its wits."
"oh, thank you, thank you," said the queen, "and when will it come?"
"you will find it when you get home."
"and won't you have something for yourself?" asked the queen. "any little thing you fancy would you like a country, or a sack of jewels?"
"nothing, thank you," said the witch. "i could make more diamonds in a day than i should wear in a year."
"well, but do let me do some little thing for you," the queen went on.
"aren't you tired of being a witch? wouldn't you like to be a duchess or a princess, or something like that?"
"there is one thing i should rather like," said the witch, "but it's hard to get in my trade."
"oh, tell me what," said the queen.
"i should like some one to love me," said the witch.
then the queen threw her arms around the witch's neck and kissed her half a hundred times. "why," she said, "i love you better than my life!
you've given me the baby and the baby shall love you too."
"perhaps it will," said the witch, "and when the sorrow comes, send for me. each of your fifty kisses will be a spell to bring me to you. now, drink up your medicine, there's a dear, and run along home."
so the queen drank the stuff in the pot, which was quite cool by this time, and she went out under the fringe of snakes, and they all behaved like good sunday-school children. some of them even tried to drop a curtsy to her as she went by, though that is not easy when you are hanging wrong way up by your tail. but the snakes knew the queen was friends with their mistress; so, of course, they had to do their best to be civil.
when the queen got home, sure enough there was the baby lying in the cradle with the royal arms blazoned on it, crying as naturally as possible. it had pink ribbons to tie up its sleeves, so the queen saw at once it was a girl. when the king knew this he tore his black hair with fury.
"oh, you silly, silly queen!" he said. "why didn't i marry a clever lady? did you think i went to all the trouble and expense of sending you to a witch to get a girl? you knew well enough it was a boy i wanted a boy, an heir, a prince to learn all my magic and my enchantments, and to rule the kingdom after me. i'll bet a crown my crown," he said, "you never even thought to tell the witch what kind you wanted! did you now?"
and the queen hung her head and had to confess that she had only asked for a child.
"very well, madam," said the king, "very well have your own way. and make the most of your daughter, while she is a child."
the queen did. all the years of her life had never held half so much happiness as now lived in each of the moments when she held her little baby in her arms. and the years went on, and the king grew more and more clever at magic, and more and more disagreeable at home, and the princess grew more beautiful and more dear every day she lived.
the queen and the princess were feeding the goldfish in the courtyard fountains with crumbs of the princess's eighteenth birthday cake, when the king came into the courtyard, looking as black as thunder, with his black raven hopping after him. he shook his fist at his family, as indeed he generally did whenever he met them, for he was not a king with pretty home manners. the raven sat down on the edge of the marble basin and tried to peck the goldfish. it was all he could do to show that he was in the same temper as his master.
"a girl indeed!" said the king angrily. "i wonder you can dare to look me in the face, when you remember how your silliness has spoiled everything."
"you oughtn't to speak to my mother like that," said the princess. she was eighteen, and it came to her suddenly and all in a moment that she was a grown-up, so she spoke out.
the king could not utter a word for several minutes. he was too angry.
but the queen said, "my dear child, don't interfere," quite crossly, for she was frightened.
and to her husband she said, "my dear, why do you go on worrying about it? our daughter is not a boy, it is true but she may marry a clever man who could rule your kingdom after you, and learn as much magic as ever you cared to teach him."
then the king found his tongue.
"if she does marry," he said, slowly, "her husband will have to be a very clever man oh, yes, very clever indeed! and he will have to know a very great deal more magic than i shall ever care to teach him."
the queen knew at once by the king's tone that he was going to be disagreeable.
"ah," she said, "don't punish the child because she loves her mother."
"i'm not going to punish her for that," said he. "i'm only going to teach her to respect her father."
and without another word he went off to his laboratory and worked all night, boiling different-colored things in crucibles, and copying charms in curious twisted letters from old brown books with mold stains on their yellowy pages.
the next day his plan was all arranged. he took the poor princess to the lone tower, which stands on an island in the sea, a thousand miles from everywhere. he gave her a dowry, and settled a handsome income on her.
he engaged a competent dragon to look after her, and also a respectable griffin whose birth and upbringing he knew all about. and he said: "here you shall stay, my dear, respectful daughter, till the clever man comes to marry you. he'll have to be clever enough to sail a ship through the nine whirlpools that spin around the island, and to kill the dragon and the griffin. till he comes you'll never get any older or any wiser. no doubt he will soon come. you can employ yourself in embroidering your wedding gown. i wish you joy, my dutiful child."
and his carriage, drawn by live thunderbolts (thunder travels very fast), rose in the air and disappeared, and the poor princess was left, with the dragon and the griffin, on the island of the nine whirlpools.
the queen, left at home, cried for a day and a night, and then she remembered the witch and called to her. and the witch came, and the queen told her all.
"for the sake of the twice twenty-five kisses you gave me," said the witch, "i will help you. but it is the last thing i can do, and it is not much. your daughter is under a spell, and i can take you to her.
but, if i do, you will have to be turned to stone, and to stay so till the spell is taken off the child."
"i would be a stone for a thousand years," said the poor queen, "if at the end of them i could see my dear again."
so the witch took the queen in a carriage drawn by live sunbeams (which travel more quickly than anything else in the world, and much quicker than thunder), and so away and away to the lone tower on the island of the nine whirlpools. and there was the princess sitting on the floor in the best room of the lone tower, crying as if her heart would break, and the dragon and the griffin were sitting primly on each side of her.
"oh, mother, mother, mother," she cried, and hung around the queen's neck as if she would never let go.
"now," said the witch, when they had all cried as much as was good for them, "i can do one or two other little things for you. time shall not make the princess sad. all days will be like one day till her deliverer comes. and you and i, dear queen, will sit in stone at the gate of the tower. in doing this for you i lose all my witch's powers, and when i say the spell that changes you to stone, i shall change with you, and if ever we come out of the stone, i shall be a witch no more, but only a happy old woman."
then the three kissed one another again and again, and the witch said the spell, and on each side of the door there was now a stone lady. one of them had a stone crown on its head and a stone scepter in its hand; but the other held a stone tablet with words on it, which the griffin and the dragon could not read, though they had both had a very good education.
and now all days seemed like one day to the princess, and the next day always seemed the day when her mother would come out of the stone and kiss her again. and the years went slowly by. the wicked king died, and some one else took his kingdom, and many things were changed in the world; but the island did not change, nor the nine whirlpools, nor the griffin, nor the dragon, nor the two stone ladies. and all the time, from the very first, the day of the princess's deliverance was coming, creeping nearer, and nearer, and nearer. but no one saw it coming except the princess, and she only in dreams. and the years went by in tens and in hundreds, and still the nine whirlpools spun around, roaring in triumph the story of many a good ship that had gone down in their swirl, bearing with it some prince who had tried to win the princess and her dowry. and the great sea knew all the other stories of the princes who had come from very far, and had seen the whirlpools, and had shaken their wise young heads and said: "'bout ship!" and gone discreetly home to their nice, safe, comfortable kingdoms.
but no one told the story of the deliverer who was to come. and the years went by.
now, after more scores of years than you would like to add up on your slate, a certain sailor-boy sailed on the high seas with his uncle, who was a skilled skipper. and the boy could reef a sail and coil a rope and keep the ship's nose steady before the wind. and he was as good a boy as you would find in a month of sundays, and worthy to be a prince.
now there is something which is wiser than all the world and it knows when people are worthy to be princes. and this something came from the farther side of the seventh world, and whispered in the boy's ear.
and the boy heard, though he did not know he heard, and he looked out over the black sea with the white foam-horses galloping over it, and far away he saw a light. and he said to the skipper, his uncle: "what light is that?"
then the skipper said: "all good things defend you, nigel, from sailing near that light. it is not mentioned in all charts; but it is marked in the old chart i steer by, which was my father's father's before me, and his father's father's before him. it is the light that shines from the lone tower that stands above the nine whirlpools. and when my father's father was young he heard from the very old man, his great-great-grandfather, that in that tower an enchanted princess, fairer than the day, waits to be delivered. but there is no deliverance, so never steer that way; and think no more of the princess, for that is only an idle tale. but the whirlpools are quite real."
so, of course, from that day nigel thought of nothing else. and as he sailed hither and thither upon the high seas he saw from time to time the light that shone out to sea across the wild swirl of the nine whirlpools. and one night, when the ship was at anchor and the skipper asleep in his bunk, nigel launched the ship's boat and steered alone over the dark sea towards the light. he dared not go very near till daylight should show him what, indeed, were the whirlpools he had to dread.
but when the dawn came he saw the lone tower standing dark against the pink and primrose of the east, and about its base the sullen swirl of black water, and he heard the wonderful roar of it. so he hung off and on, all that day and for six days besides. and when he had watched seven days he knew something. for you are certain to know something if you give for seven days your whole thought to it, even though it be only the first declension, or the nine-times table, or the dates of the norman kings.
what he knew was this: that for five minutes out of the 1,440 minutes that make up a day the whirlpools slipped into silence, while the tide went down and left the yellow sand bare. and every day this happened, but every day it was five minutes earlier than it had been the day before. he made sure of this by the ship's chronometer, which he had thoughtfully brought with him.
see page 88.]
so on the eighth day, at five minutes before noon, nigel got ready. and when the whirlpools suddenly stopped whirling and the tide sank, like water in a basin that has a hole in it, he stuck to his oars and put his back into his stroke, and presently beached the boat on the yellow sand. then he dragged it into a cave, and sat down to wait.
by five minutes and one second past noon, the whirlpools were black and busy again, and nigel peeped out of his cave. and on the rocky ledge overhanging the sea he saw a princess as beautiful as the day, with golden hair and a green gown and he went out to meet her.
"i've come to save you," he said. "how darling and beautiful you are!"
"you are very good, and very clever, and very dear," said the princess, smiling and giving him both her hands.
he shut a little kiss in each hand before he let them go.
"so now, when the tide is low again, i will take you away in my boat,"
he said.
"but what about the dragon and the griffin?" asked the princess.
"dear me," said nigel. "i didn't know about them. i suppose i can kill them?"
"don't be a silly boy," said the princess, pretending to be very grown up, for, though she had been on the island time only knows how many years, she was just eighteen, and she still liked pretending. "you haven't a sword, or a shield, or anything!"
"well, don't the beasts ever go to sleep?"
"why, yes," said the princess, "but only once in twenty-four hours, and then the dragon is turned to stone. but the griffin has dreams. the griffin sleeps at teatime every day, but the dragon sleeps every day for five minutes, and every day it is three minutes later than it was the day before."
"what time does he sleep today?" asked nigel.
"at eleven," said the princess.
"ah," said nigel, "can you do sums?"
"no," said the princess sadly. "i was never good at them."
"then i must," said nigel. "i can, but it's slow work, and it makes me very unhappy. it'll take me days and days."
"don't begin yet," said the princess. "you'll have plenty of time to be unhappy when i'm not with you. tell me all about yourself."
so he did. and then she told him all about herself.
"i know i've been here a long time," she said, "but i don't know what time is. and i am very busy sewing silk flowers on a golden gown for my wedding day. and the griffin does the housework his wings are so convenient and feathery for sweeping and dusting. and the dragon does the cooking he's hot inside, so, of course, it's no trouble to him; and though i don't know what time is i'm sure it's time for my wedding day, because my golden gown only wants one more white daisy on the sleeve, and a lily on the bosom of it, and then it will be ready."
just then they heard a dry, rustling clatter on the rocks above them and a snorting sound. "it's the dragon," said the princess hurriedly.
"good-bye. be a good boy, and get your sum done." and she ran away and left him to his arithmetic.
now, the sum was this: "if the whirlpools stop and the tide goes down once in every twenty-four hours, and they do it five minutes earlier every twenty-four hours, and if the dragon sleeps every day, and he does it three minutes later every day, in how many days and at what time in the day will the tide go down three minutes before the dragon falls asleep?"
it is quite a simple sum, as you see: you could do it in a minute because you have been to a good school and have taken pains with your lessons; but it was quite otherwise with poor nigel. he sat down to work out his sum with a piece of chalk on a smooth stone. he tried it by practice and the unitary method, by multiplication, and by rule-of-three-and-three-quarters. he tried it by decimals and by compound interest. he tried it by square root and by cube root. he tried it by addition, simple and otherwise, and he tried it by mixed examples in vulgar fractions. but it was all of no use. then he tried to do the sum by algebra, by simple and by quadratic equations, by trigonometry, by logarithms, and by conic sections. but it would not do. he got an answer every time, it is true, but it was always a different one, and he could not feel sure which answer was right.
and just as he was feeling how much more important than anything else it is to be able to do your sums, the princess came back. and now it was getting dark.
"why, you've been seven hours over that sum," she said, "and you haven't done it yet. look here, this is what is written on the tablet of the statue by the lower gate. it has figures in it. perhaps it is the answer to the sum."
she held out to him a big white magnolia leaf. and she had scratched on it with the pin of her pearl brooch, and it had turned brown where she had scratched it, as magnolia leaves will do. nigel read:
after nine days t ii. 24.
d ii. 27 ans.
p.s. and the griffin is artificial. r.
he clapped his hands softly.
"dear princess," he said, "i know that's the right answer. it says r too, you see. but i'll just prove it." so he hastily worked the sum backward in decimals and equations and conic sections, and all the rules he could think of. and it came right every time.
"so now we must wait," said he. and they waited.
and every day the princess came to see nigel and brought him food cooked by the dragon, and he lived in his cave, and talked to her when she was there, and thought about her when she was not, and they were both as happy as the longest day in summer. then at last came the day. nigel and the princess laid their plans.
"you're sure he won't hurt you, my only treasure?" said nigel.
"quite," said the princess. "i only wish i were half as sure that he wouldn't hurt you."
"my princess," he said tenderly, "two great powers are on our side: the power of love and the power of arithmetic. those two are stronger than anything else in the world."
so when the tide began to go down, nigel and the princess ran out on to the sands, and there, in full sight of the terrace where the dragon kept watch, nigel took his princess in his arms and kissed her. the griffin was busy sweeping the stairs of the lone tower, but the dragon saw, and he gave a cry of rage and it was like twenty engines all letting off steam at the top of their voices inside cannon street station.
and the two lovers stood looking up at the dragon. he was dreadful to look at. his head was white with age and his beard had grown so long that he caught his claws in it as he walked. his wings were white with the salt that had settled on them from the spray of the sea. his tail was long and thick and jointed and white, and had little legs to it, any number of them far too many so that it looked like a very large fat silkworm; and his claws were as long as lessons and as sharp as bayonets.
"good-bye, love!" cried nigel, and ran out across the yellow sand toward the sea. he had one end of a cord tied to his arm.
the dragon was clambering down the face of the cliff, and next moment he was crawling and writhing and sprawling and wriggling across the beach after nigel, making great holes in the sand with his heavy feet and the very end of his tail, where there were no legs, made, as it dragged, a mark in the sand such as you make when you launch a boat; and he breathed fire till the wet sand hissed again, and the water of the little rock pools got quite frightened, and all went off in steam.
still nigel held on and the dragon after him. the princess could see nothing for the steam, and she stood crying bitterly, but still holding on tight with her right hand to the other end of the cord that nigel had told her to hold; while with her left she held the ship's chronometer, and looked at it through her tears as he had bidden her look, so as to know when to pull the rope.
on went nigel over the sand, and on went the dragon after him. and the tide was low, and sleepy little waves lapped the sand's edge.
now at the lip of the water, nigel paused and looked back, and the dragon made a bound, beginning a scream of rage that was like all the engines of all the railways in england. but it never uttered the second half of that scream, for now it knew suddenly that it was sleepy it turned to hurry back to dry land, because sleeping near whirlpools is so unsafe. but before it reached the shore sleep caught it and turned it to stone. nigel, seeing this, ran shoreward for his life and the tide began to flow in, and the time of the whirlpools' sleep was nearly over, and he stumbled and he waded and he swam, and the princess pulled for dear life at the cord in her hand, and pulled him up on to the dry shelf of rock just as the great sea dashed in and made itself once more into the girdle of nine whirlpools all around the island.
but the dragon was asleep under the whirlpools, and when he woke up from being asleep he found he was drowned, so there was an end of him.
"now, there's only the griffin," said nigel. and the princess said:
"yes only " and she kissed nigel and went back to sew the last leaf of the last lily on the bosom of her wedding gown. she thought and thought of what was written on the stone about the griffin being artificial and next day she said to nigel: "you know a griffin is half a lion and half an eagle, and the other two halves when they've joined make the leo-griff. but i've never seen him. yet i have an idea."
so they talked it over and arranged everything.
when the griffin fell asleep that afternoon at teatime, nigel went softly behind him and trod on his tail, and at the same time the princess cried: "look out! there's a lion behind you."
and the griffin, waking suddenly from his dreams, twisted his large neck around to look for the lion, saw a lion's flank, and fastened its eagle beak in it. for the griffin had been artificially made by the king-enchanter, and the two halves had never really got used to each other. so now the eagle half of the griffin, who was still rather sleepy, believed that it was fighting a lion, and the lion part, being half asleep, thought it was fighting an eagle, and the whole griffin in its deep drowsiness hadn't the sense to pull itself together and remember what it was made of. so the griffin rolled over and over, one end of it fighting with the other, till the eagle end pecked the lion end to death, and the lion end tore the eagle end with its claws till it died. and so the griffin that was made of a lion and an eagle perished, exactly as if it had been made of kilkenny cats.
"poor griffin," said the princess, "it was very good at the housework. i always liked it better than the dragon: it wasn't so hot-tempered."
at that moment there was a soft, silky rush behind the princess, and there was her mother, the queen, who had slipped out of the stone statue at the moment the griffin was dead, and now came hurrying to take her dear daughter in her arms. the witch was clambering slowly off her pedestal. she was a little stiff from standing still so long.
when they had all explained everything over and over to each other as many times as was good for them, the witch said: "well, but what about the whirlpools?"
and nigel said he didn't know. then the witch said: "i'm not a witch anymore. i'm only a happy old woman, but i know some things still. those whirlpools were made by the enchanter-king's dropping nine drops of his blood into the sea. and his blood was so wicked that the sea has been trying ever since to get rid of it, and that made the whirlpools. now you've only got to go out at low tide."
so nigel understood and went out at low tide, and found in the sandy hollow left by the first whirlpool a great red ruby. that was the first drop of the wicked king's blood. the next day nigel found another, and next day another, and so on till the ninth day, and then the sea was as smooth as glass.
the nine rubies were used afterwards in agriculture. you had only to throw them out into a field if you wanted it plowed. then the whole surface of the land turned itself over in its anxiety to get rid of something so wicked, and in the morning the field was found to be plowed as thoroughly as any young man at oxford. so the wicked king did some good after all.
when the sea was smooth, ships came from far and wide, bringing people to hear the wonderful story. and a beautiful palace was built, and the princess was married to nigel in her gold dress, and they all lived happily as long as was good for them.
the dragon still lies, a stone dragon on the sand, and at low tide the little children play around him and over him. but the pieces that were left of the griffin were buried under the herb-bed in the palace garden, because it had been so good at housework, and it wasn't its fault that it had been made so badly and put to such poor work as guarding a lady from her lover.
i have no doubt that you will wish to know what the princess lived on during the long years when the dragon did the cooking. my dear, she lived on her income and that is a thing that a great many people would like to be able to do.
the dragon tamers]
vi. the dragon tamers
there was once an old, old castle it was so old that its walls and towers and turrets and gateways and arches had crumbled to ruins, and of all its old splendor there were only two little rooms left; and it was here that john the blacksmith had set up his forge. he was too poor to live in a proper house, and no one asked any rent for the rooms in the ruin, because all the lords of the castle were dead and gone this many a year. so there john blew his bellows and hammered his iron and did all the work which came his way. this was not much, because most of the trade went to the mayor of the town, who was also a blacksmith in quite a large way of business, and had his huge forge facing the square of the town, and had twelve apprentices, all hammering like a nest of woodpeckers, and twelve journeymen to order the apprentices about, and a patent forge and a self-acting hammer and electric bellows, and all things handsome about him. so of course the townspeople, whenever they wanted a horse shod or a shaft mended, went to the mayor. john the blacksmith struggled on as best he could, with a few odd jobs from travelers and strangers who did not know what a superior forge the mayor's was. the two rooms were warm and weather-tight, but not very large; so the blacksmith got into the way of keeping his old iron, his odds and ends, his fagots, and his twopence worth of coal in the great dungeon down under the castle. it was a very fine dungeon indeed, with a handsome vaulted roof and big iron rings whose staples were built into the wall, very strong and convenient for tying captives to, and at one end was a broken flight of wide steps leading down no one knew where.
even the lords of the castle in the good old times had never known where those steps led to, but every now and then they would kick a prisoner down the steps in their lighthearted, hopeful way, and sure enough, the prisoners never came back. the blacksmith had never dared to go beyond the seventh step, and no more have i so i know no more than he did what was at the bottom of those stairs.
john the blacksmith had a wife and a little baby. when his wife was not doing the housework she used to nurse the baby and cry, remembering the happy days when she lived with her father, who kept seventeen cows and lived quite in the country, and when john used to come courting her in the summer evenings, as smart as smart, with a posy in his buttonhole.
and now john's hair was getting gray, and there was hardly ever enough to eat.
as for the baby, it cried a good deal at odd times; but at night, when its mother had settled down to sleep, it would always begin to cry, quite as a matter of course, so that she hardly got any rest at all.
this made her very tired.
the baby could make up for its bad nights during the day if it liked, but the poor mother couldn't. so whenever she had nothing to do she used to sit and cry, because she was tired out with work and worry.
one evening the blacksmith was busy with his forge. he was making a goat-shoe for the goat of a very rich lady, who wished to see how the goat liked being shod, and also whether the shoe would come to fivepence or sevenpence before she ordered the whole set. this was the only order john had had that week. and as he worked his wife sat and nursed the baby, who, for a wonder, was not crying.
presently, over the noise of the bellows and over the clank of the iron, there came another sound. the blacksmith and his wife looked at each other.
"i heard nothing," said he.
"neither did i," said she.
but the noise grew louder and the two were so anxious not to hear it that he hammered away at the goat-shoe harder than he had ever hammered in his life, and she began to sing to the baby a thing she had not had the heart to do for weeks.
but through the blowing and hammering and singing the noise came louder and louder, and the more they tried not to hear it, the more they had to. it was like the noise of some great creature purring, purring, purring and the reason they did not want to believe they really heard it was that it came from the great dungeon down below, where the old iron was, and the firewood and the twopence worth of coal, and the broken steps that went down into the dark and ended no one knew where.
"it can't be anything in the dungeon," said the blacksmith, wiping his face. "why, i shall have to go down there after more coals in a minute."
"there isn't anything there, of course. how could there be?" said his wife. and they tried so hard to believe that there could be nothing there that presently they very nearly did believe it.
then the blacksmith took his shovel in one hand and his riveting hammer in the other, and hung the old stable lantern on his little finger, and went down to get the coals.
"i am not taking the hammer because i think there is something there,"
said he, "but it is handy for breaking the large lumps of coal."
"i quite understand," said his wife, who had brought the coal home in her apron that very afternoon, and knew that it was all coal dust.
so he went down the winding stairs to the dungeon and stood at the bottom of the steps, holding the lantern above his head just to see that the dungeon really was empty, as usual. half of it was empty as usual, except for the old iron and odds and ends, and the firewood and the coals. but the other side was not empty. it was quite full, and what it was full of was dragon.
"it must have come up those nasty broken steps from goodness knows where," said the blacksmith to himself, trembling all over, as he tried to creep back up the winding stairs.
but the dragon was too quick for him it put out a great claw and caught him by the leg, and as it moved it rattled like a great bunch of keys, or like the sheet iron they make thunder out of in pantomimes.
"no you don't," said the dragon in a spluttering voice, like a damp squib.
"deary, deary me," said poor john, trembling more than ever in the claw of the dragon. "here's a nice end for a respectable blacksmith!"
the dragon seemed very much struck by this remark.
"do you mind saying that again?" said he, quite politely.
so john said again, very distinctly:
"here is a nice end for a respectable blacksmith."
"i didn't know," said the dragon. "fancy now! you're the very man i wanted."
"so i understood you to say before," said john, his teeth chattering.
"oh, i don't mean what you mean," said the dragon, "but i should like you to do a job for me. one of my wings has got some of the rivets out of it just above the joint. could you put that to rights?"
"i might, sir," said john, politely, for you must always be polite to a possible customer, even if he be a dragon.
"a master craftsman you are a master, of course? can see in a minute what's wrong," the dragon went on. "just come around here and feel my plates, will you?"
john timidly went around when the dragon took his claw away; and sure enough, the dragon's wing was hanging loose, and several of the plates near the joint certainly wanted riveting.
the dragon seemed to be made almost entirely of iron armor a sort of tawny, red-rust color it was; from damp, no doubt and under it he seemed to be covered with something furry.
all the blacksmith welled up in john's heart, and he felt more at ease.
"you could certainly do with a rivet or two, sir," said he. "in fact, you want a good many."
"well, get to work, then," said the dragon. "you mend my wing, and then i'll go out and eat up all the town, and if you make a really smart job of it i'll eat you last. there!"
"i don't want to be eaten last, sir," said john.
"well then, i'll eat you first," said the dragon.
"i don't want that, sir, either," said john.
"go on with you, you silly man," said the dragon, "you don't know your own silly mind. come, set to work."
"i don't like the job, sir," said john, "and that's the truth. i know how easily accidents happen. it's all fair and smooth, and 'please rivet me, and i'll eat you last' and then you get to work and you give a gentleman a bit of a nip or a dig under his rivets and then it's fire and smoke, and no apologies will meet the case."
"upon my word of honor as a dragon," said the other.
"i know you wouldn't do it on purpose, sir," said john, "but any gentleman will give a jump and a sniff if he's nipped, and one of your sniffs would be enough for me. now, if you'd just let me fasten you up?"
"it would be so undignified," objected the dragon.
"we always fasten a horse up," said john, "and he's the 'noble animal.'"
"it's all very well," said the dragon, "but how do i know you'd untie me again when you'd riveted me? give me something in pledge. what do you value most?"
"my hammer," said john. "a blacksmith is nothing without a hammer."
"but you'd want that for riveting me. you must think of something else, and at once, or i'll eat you first."
at this moment the baby in the room above began to scream. its mother had been so quiet that it thought she had settled down for the night, and that it was time to begin.
"whatever's that?" said the dragon, starting so that every plate on his body rattled.
"it's only the baby," said john.
"what's that?" asked the dragon. "something you value?"
"well, yes, sir, rather," said the blacksmith.
"then bring it here," said the dragon, "and i'll take care of it till you've done riveting me, and you shall tie me up."
"all right, sir," said john, "but i ought to warn you. babies are poison to dragons, so i don't deceive you. it's all right to touch but don't you go putting it into your mouth. i shouldn't like to see any harm come to a nice-looking gentleman like you."
the dragon purred at this compliment and said: "all right, i'll be careful. now go and fetch the thing, whatever it is."
so john ran up the steps as quickly as he could, for he knew that if the dragon got impatient before it was fastened, it could heave up the roof of the dungeon with one heave of its back, and kill them all in the ruins. his wife was asleep, in spite of the baby's cries; and john picked up the baby and took it down and put it between the dragon's front paws.
"you just purr to it, sir," he said, "and it'll be as good as gold."
so the dragon purred, and his purring pleased the baby so much that it stopped crying.
then john rummaged among the heap of old iron and found there some heavy chains and a great collar that had been made in the days when men sang over their work and put their hearts into it, so that the things they made were strong enough to bear the weight of a thousand years, let alone a dragon.
john fastened the dragon up with the collar and the chains, and when he had padlocked them all on safely he set to work to find out how many rivets would be needed.
"six, eight, ten twenty, forty," said he. "i haven't half enough rivets in the shop. if you'll excuse me, sir, i'll step around to another forge and get a few dozen. i won't be a minute."
and off he went, leaving the baby between the dragon's fore-paws, laughing and crowing with pleasure at the very large purr of it.
john ran as hard as he could into the town, and found the mayor and corporation.
"there's a dragon in my dungeon," he said; "i've chained him up. now come and help to get my baby away."
and he told them all about it.
but they all happened to have engagements for that evening; so they praised john's cleverness, and said they were quite content to leave the matter in his hands.
"but what about my baby?" said john.
"oh, well," said the mayor, "if anything should happen, you will always be able to remember that your baby perished in a good cause."
so john went home again, and told his wife some of the tale.
"you've given the baby to the dragon!" she cried. "oh, you unnatural parent!"
"hush," said john, and he told her some more. "now," he said, "i'm going down. after i've been down you can go, and if you keep your head the boy will be all right."
so down went the blacksmith, and there was the dragon purring away with all his might to keep the baby quiet.
"hurry up, can't you?" he said. "i can't keep up this noise all night."
"i'm very sorry, sir," said the blacksmith, "but all the shops are shut.
the job must wait till the morning. and don't forget you've promised to take care of that baby. you'll find it a little wearing, i'm afraid.
good night, sir."
the dragon had purred till he was quite out of breath so now he stopped, and as soon as everything was quiet the baby thought everyone must have settled for the night, and that it was time to begin to scream. so it began.
"oh, dear," said the dragon, "this is awful." he patted the baby with his claw, but it screamed more than ever.
"and i am so tired too," said the dragon. "i did so hope i should have a good night."
the baby went on screaming.
"there'll be no peace for me after this," said the dragon. "it's enough to ruin one's nerves. hush, then did 'ums, then." and he tried to quiet the baby as if it had been a young dragon. but when he began to sing "hush-a-by, dragon," the baby screamed more and more and more. "i can't keep it quiet," said the dragon; and then suddenly he saw a woman sitting on the steps. "here, i say," said he, "do you know anything about babies?"
"i do, a little," said the mother.
"then i wish you'd take this one, and let me get some sleep," said the dragon, yawning. "you can bring it back in the morning before the blacksmith comes."
so the mother picked up the baby and took it upstairs and told her husband, and they went to bed happy, for they had caught the dragon and saved the baby.
and next day john went down and explained carefully to the dragon exactly how matters stood, and he got an iron gate with a grating to it and set it up at the foot of the steps, and the dragon mewed furiously for days and days, but when he found it was no good he was quiet.
so now john went to the mayor, and said: "i've got the dragon and i've saved the town."
"noble preserver," cried the mayor, "we will get up a subscription for you, and crown you in public with a laurel wreath."
so the mayor put his name down for five pounds, and the corporation each gave three, and other people gave their guineas and half guineas and half crowns and crowns, and while the subscription was being made the mayor ordered three poems at his own expense from the town poet to celebrate the occasion. the poems were very much more admired, especially by the mayor and corporation.
the first poem dealt with the noble conduct of the mayor in arranging to have the dragon tied up. the second described the splendid assistance rendered by the corporation. and the third expressed the pride and joy of the poet in being permitted to sing such deeds, beside which the actions of st. george must appear quite commonplace to all with a feeling heart or a well-balanced brain.
when the subscription was finished there was a thousand pounds, and a committee was formed to settle what should be done with it. a third of it went to pay for a banquet to the mayor and corporation; another third was spent in buying a gold collar with a dragon on it for the mayor and gold medals with dragons on them for the corporation; and what was left went in committee expenses.
so there was nothing for the blacksmith except the laurel wreath and the knowledge that it really was he who had saved the town. but after this things went a little better with the blacksmith. to begin with, the baby did not cry so much as it had before. then the rich lady who owned the goat was so touched by john's noble action that she ordered a complete set of shoes at 2 shillings, 4 pence, and even made it up to 2 shillings, 6 pence, in grateful recognition of his public-spirited conduct. then tourists used to come in breaks from quite a long way off, and pay twopence each to go down the steps and peep through the iron grating at the rusty dragon in the dungeon and it was threepence extra for each party if the blacksmith let off colored fire to see it by, which, as the fire was extremely short, was twopence-halfpenny clear profit every time. and the blacksmith's wife used to provide teas at ninepence a head, and altogether things grew brighter week by week.
the baby named john, after his father, and called johnnie for short began presently to grow up. he was great friends with tina, the daughter of the whitesmith, who lived nearly opposite. she was a dear little girl with yellow pigtails and blue eyes, and she was tired of hearing the story of how johnnie, when he was a baby, had been minded by a real dragon.
the two children used to go together to peep through the iron grating at the dragon, and sometimes they would hear him mew piteously. and they would light a halfpenny's worth of colored fire to look at him by. and they grew older and wiser.
at last one day the mayor and corporation, hunting the hare in their gold gowns, came screaming back to the town gates with the news that a lame, humpy giant, as big as a tin church, was coming over the marshes toward the town.
"we're lost," said the mayor. "i'd give a thousand pounds to anyone who could keep that giant out of the town. i know what he eats by his teeth."
no one seemed to know what to do. but johnnie and tina were listening, and they looked at each other, and ran off as fast as their boots would carry them.
one place suits one person, another place suits another person. for my part i prefer to live in the country, like timmy willie.
the little red hen
a little red hen lived in a barnyard. she spent almost all of her time walking about the barnyard in her picketty-pecketty fashion, scratching everywhere for worms.
she dearly loved fat, delicious worms and felt they were absolutely necessary to the health of her children. as often as she found a worm she would call "chuck-chuck-chuck!" to her chickies.
when they were gathered about her, she would distribute choice morsels of her tid-bit. a busy little body was she!
a cat usually napped lazily in the barn door, not even bothering herself to scare the rat who ran here and there as he pleased. and as for the pig who lived in the sty he did not care what happened so long as he could eat and grow fat.
one day the little red hen found a seed. it was a wheat seed, but the little red hen was so accustomed to bugs and worms that she supposed this to be some new and perhaps very delicious kind of meat. she bit it gently and found that it resembled a worm in no way whatsoever as to taste although because it was long and slender, a little red hen might easily be fooled by its appearance.
carrying it about, she made many inquiries as to what it might be. she found it was a wheat seed and that, if planted, it would grow up and when ripe it could be made into flour and then into bread.
when she discovered that, she knew it ought to be planted. she was so busy hunting food for herself and her family that, naturally, she thought she ought not to take time to plant it.
so she thought of the pig upon whom time must hang heavily and of the cat who had nothing to do, and of the great fat rat with his idle hours, and she called loudly:
"who will plant the seed?"
but the pig said, "not i," and the cat said, "not i," and the rat said, "not i."
"well, then," said the little red hen, "i will."
and she did.
then she went on with her daily duties through the long summer days, scratching for worms and feeding her chicks, while the pig grew fat, and the cat grew fat, and the rat grew fat, and the wheat grew tall and ready for harvest.
so one day the little red hen chanced to notice how large the wheat was and that the grain was ripe, so she ran about calling briskly:
"who will cut the wheat?"
the pig said, "not i," the cat said, "not i," and the rat said, "not i."
"well, then," said the little red hen, "i will."
and she did.
she got the sickle from among the farmer's tools in the barn and proceeded to cut off all of the big plant of wheat.
on the ground lay the nicely cut wheat, ready to be gathered and threshed, but the newest and yellowest and downiest of mrs. hen's chicks set up a "peep-peep-peeping" in their most vigorous fashion, proclaiming to the world at large, but most particularly to their mother, that she was neglecting them.
poor little red hen! she felt quite bewildered and hardly knew where to turn.
her attention was sorely divided between her duty to her children and her duty to the wheat, for which she felt responsible.
so, again, in a very hopeful tone, she called out, "who will thresh the wheat?"
but the pig, with a grunt, said, "not i,"
and the cat, with a meow, said, "not i," and the rat, with a squeak, said, "not i."
so the little red hen, looking, it must be admitted, rather discouraged, said, "well, i will, then."
and she did.
of course, she had to feed her babies first, though, and when she had gotten them all to sleep for their afternoon nap, she went out and threshed the wheat. then she called out: "who will carry the wheat to the mill to be ground?"
turning their backs with snippy glee, that pig said, "not i,"
and that cat said, "not i," and that rat said, "not i."
so the good little red hen could do nothing but say, "i will then."
and she did.
carrying the sack of wheat, she trudged off to the distant mill. there she ordered the wheat ground into beautiful white flour. when the miller brought her the flour she walked slowly back all the way to her own barnyard in her own picketty-pecketty fashion.
she even managed, in spite of her load, to catch a nice juicy worm now and then and had one left for the babies when she reached them. those cunning little fluff-balls were so glad to see their mother. for the first time, they really appreciated her.after this really strenuous day mrs. hen retired to her slumbers earlier than usual indeed, before the colors came into the sky to herald the setting of the sun, her usual bedtime hour.
she would have liked to sleep late in the morning, but her chicks, joining in the morning chorus of the hen yard, drove away all hopes of such a luxury.
even as she sleepily half opened one eye, the thought came to her that to-day that wheat must, somehow, be made into bread.
she was not in the habit of making bread, although, of course, anyone can make it if he or she follows the recipe with care, and she knew perfectly well that she could do it if necessary.
so after her children were fed and made sweet and fresh for the day, she hunted up the pig, the cat and the rat.
still confident that they would surely help her some day she sang out, "who will make the bread?"
alas for the little red hen! once more her hopes were dashed! for the pig said, "not i,"the cat said, "not i," and the rat said, "not i."
so the little red hen said once more, "i will then," and she did.
feeling that she might have known all the time that she would have to do it all herself, she went and put on a fresh apron and spotless cook's cap. first of all she set the dough, as was proper. when it was time she brought out the moulding board and the baking tins, moulded the bread, divided it into loaves, and put them into the oven to bake.
all the while the cat sat lazily by, giggling and chuckling.and close at hand the vain rat powdered his nose and admired himself in a mirror.
in the distance could be heard the long-drawn snores of the dozing pig.
at last the great moment arrived. a delicious odor was wafted upon the autumn breeze. everywhere the barnyard citizens sniffed the air with delight.
the red hen ambled in her picketty-pecketty way toward the source of all this excitement.
although she appeared to be perfectly calm, in reality she could only with difficulty restrain an impulse to dance and sing, for had she not done all the work on this wonderful bread?
small wonder that she was the most excited person in the barnyard!
she did not know whether the bread would be fit to eat, but joy of joys! when the lovely brown loaves came out of the oven, they were done to perfection.
then, probably because she had acquired the habit, the red hen called:
"who will eat the bread?"
all the animals in the barnyard were watching hungrily and smacking their lips in anticipation, and the pig said, "i will," the cat said, "i will," the rat said, "i will."
but the little red hen said,
"no, you won't. i will."
and she did.
old tales from the north
east of the sun and west of the moon
once on a time there was a poor husbandman who had so many children that he hadn't much of either food or clothing to give them. pretty children they all were, but the prettiest was the youngest daughter, who was so lovely there was no end to her loveliness.
so one day, 'twas on a thursday evening late at the fall of the year, the weather was so wild and rough outside, and it was so cruelly dark, and rain fell and wind blew, till the walls of the cottage shook again. there they all sat round the fire, busy with this thing and that. but just then, all at once something gave three taps on the window-pane. then the father went out to see what was the matter; and, when he got out of doors, what should he see but a great big white bear.
"good-evening to you!" said the white bear.
"the same to you!" said the man.
"will you give me your youngest daughter? if you will, i'll make you as rich as you are now poor," said the bear.
well, the man would not be at all sorry to be so rich; but still he thought he must have a bit of a talk with his daughter first; so he went in and told them how there was a great white bear waiting outside, who had given his word to make them so rich if he could only have the youngest daughter.
the lassie said "no!" outright. nothing could get her to say anything else; so the man went out and settled it with the white bear that he should come again the next thursday evening and get an answer.
meantime he talked his daughter over, and kept on telling her of all the riches they would get, and how well off she would be herself; and so at last she thought better of it, and washed and mended her rags, made herself as smart as she could, and was ready to start. i can't say her packing gave her much trouble.
next thursday evening came the white bear to fetch her, and she got upon his back with her bundle, and off they went. so, when they had gone a bit of the way, the white bear said:
"are you afraid?"
"no," she wasn't.
"well! mind and hold tight by my shaggy coat, and then there's nothing to fear," said the bear.
so she rode a long, long way, till they came to a great steep hill.
there, on the face of it, the white bear gave a knock, and a door opened, and they came into a castle where there were many rooms all lit up; rooms gleaming with silver and gold; and there, too, was a table ready laid, and it was all as grand as grand could be. then the white bear gave her a silver bell; and when she wanted anything, she was only to ring it, and she would get it at once.
well, after she had eaten and drunk, and evening wore on, she got sleepy after her journey, and thought she would like to go to bed, so she rang the bell; and she had scarce taken hold of it before she came into a chamber where there was a bed made, as fair and white as any one would wish to sleep in, with silken pillows and curtains and gold fringe. all that was in the room was gold or silver; but when she had gone to bed and put out the light, a man came and laid himself alongside her. that was the white bear, who threw off his beast shape at night; but she never saw him, for he always came after she had put out the light, and before the day dawned he was up and off again. so things went on happily for a while, but at last she began to get silent and sorrowful; for there she went about all day alone, and she longed to go home to see her father and mother and brothers and sisters. so one day, when the white bear asked what it was that she lacked, she said it was so dull and lonely there, and how she longed to go home to see her father and mother and brothers and sisters, and that was why she was so sad and sorrowful, because she couldn't get to them.
"well, well!" said the bear, "perhaps there's a cure for all this; but you must promise me one thing, not to talk alone with your mother, but only when the rest are by to hear; for she'll take you by the hand and try to lead you into a room alone to talk; but you must mind and not do that, else you'll bring bad luck on both of us."
so one sunday the white bear came and said, now they could set off to see her father and mother. well, off they started, she sitting on his back; and they went far and long. at last they came to a grand house, and there her brothers and sisters were running about out of doors at play, and everything was so pretty, 'twas a joy to see.
"this is where your father and mother live now," said the white bear; "but don't forget what i told you, else you'll make us both unlucky."
"no! bless her, she'd not forget;" and when she had reached the house, the white bear turned right about and left her.
then, when she went in to see her father and mother, there was such joy, there was no end to it. none of them thought they could thank her enough for all she had done for them. now, they had everything they wished, as good as good could be, and they all wanted to know how she got on where she lived.
well, she said, it was very good to live where she did; she had all she wished. what she said beside i don't know, but i don't think any of them had the right end of the stick, or that they got much out of her. but so, in the afternoon, after they had done dinner, all happened as the white bear had said. her mother wanted to talk with her alone in her bedroom; but she minded what the white bear had said, and wouldn't go upstairs.
"oh! what we have to talk about will keep!" she said, and put her mother off. but, somehow or other, her mother got round her at last, and she had to tell her the whole story. so she said, how every night when she had gone to bed a man came and lay down beside her as soon as she had put out the light; and how she never saw him, because he was always up and away before the morning dawned; and how she went about woeful and sorrowing, for she thought she should so like to see him; and how all day long she walked about there alone; and how dull and dreary and lonesome it was.
"my!" said her mother; "it may well be a troll you slept with! but now i'll teach you a lesson how to set eyes on him. i'll give you a bit of candle, which you can carry home in your bosom; just light that while he is asleep, but take care not to drop the tallow on him."
yes! she took the candle and hid it in her bosom, and as night drew on, the white bear came and fetched her away.
but when they had gone a bit of the way, the white bear asked if all hadn't happened as he had said.
"well, she couldn't say it hadn't."
"now, mind," said he, "if you have listened to your mother's advice, you have brought bad luck on us both, and then, all that has passed between us will be as nothing."
"no," she said, "she hadn't listened to her mother's advice."
so when she reached home, and had gone to bed, it was the old story over again. there came a man and lay down beside her; but at dead of night, when she heard he slept, she got up and struck a light, lit the candle, and let the light shine on him, and so she saw that he was the loveliest prince one ever set eyes on, and she fell so deep in love with him on the spot, that she thought she couldn't live if she didn't give him a kiss there and then. and so she did; but as she kissed him, she dropped three hot drops of tallow on his shirt, and he woke up.
"what have you done?" he cried; "now you have made us both unlucky, for had you held out only this one year, i had been freed. for i have a step-mother who has bewitched me, so that i am a white bear by day, and a man by night. but now all ties are snapt between us; now i must set off from you to her. she lives in a castle which stands east of the sun and west of the moon, and there, too, is a princess, with a nose three ells long, and she's the wife i must have now."
she wept and took it ill, but there was no help for it; go he must.
then she asked if she mightn't go with him.
no, she mightn't.
"tell me the way, then," she said, "and i'll search you out; that surely i may get leave to do."
"yes," she might do that, he said; "but there was no way to that place. it lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and thither she'd never find her way."
so next morning, when she woke up, both prince and castle were gone, and then she lay on a little green patch, in the midst of the gloomy thick wood, and by her side lay the same bundle of rags she had brought with her from her old home.
so when she had rubbed the sleep out of her eyes, and wept till she was tired, she set out on her way, and walked many, many days, till she came to a lofty crag. under it sat an old hag, and played with a gold apple which she tossed about. here the lassie asked if she knew the way to the prince, who lived with his step-mother in the castle, that lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and who was to marry the princess with a nose three ells long.
"how did you come to know about him?" asked the old hag; "but maybe you are the lassie who ought to have had him?"
yes, she was.
"so, so; it's you, is it?" said the old hag. "well, all i know about him is, that he lives in the castle that lies east of the sun and west of the moon, and thither you'll come, late or never; but still you may have the loan of my horse, and on him you can ride to my next neighbour. maybe she'll be able to tell you; and when you get there, just give the horse a switch under the left ear, and beg him to be off home; and, stay, this gold apple you may take with you."
so she got upon the horse, and rode a long, long time, till she came to another crag, under which sat another old hag, with a gold carding-comb. here the lassie asked if she knew the way to the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and she answered, like the first old hag, that she knew nothing about it, except it was east of the sun and west of the moon.
"and thither you'll come, late or never, but you shall have the loan of my horse to my next neighbour; maybe she'll tell you all about it; and when you get there, just switch the horse under the left ear, and beg him to be off home."
and this old hag gave her the golden carding-comb; it might be she'd find some use for it, she said. so the lassie got up on the horse, and rode a far, far way, and a weary time; and so at last she came to another great crag, under which sat another old hag, spinning with a golden spinning-wheel. her, too, she asked if she knew the way to the prince, and where the castle was that lay east of the sun and west of the moon. so it was the same thing over again.
"maybe it's you who ought to have had the prince?" said the old hag.
yes, it was.
but she, too, didn't know the way a bit better than the other two.
"east of the sun and west of the moon it was," she knew that was all.
"and thither you'll come, late or never; but i'll lend you my horse, and then i think you'd best ride to the east wind and ask him; maybe he knows those parts, and can blow you thither. but when you get to him, you need only give the horse a switch under the left ear, and he'll trot home of himself."
and so, too, she gave her the gold spinning-wheel. "maybe you'll find a use for it," said the old hag.
then on she rode many many days, a weary time, before she got to the east wind's house, but at last she did reach it, and then she asked the east wind if he could tell her the way to the prince who dwelt east of the sun and west of the moon. yes, the east wind had often heard tell of it, the prince and the castle, but he couldn't tell the way, for he had never blown so far.
"but, if you will, i'll go with you to my brother the west wind, maybe he knows, for he's much stronger. so, if you will just get on my back, i'll carry you thither."
yes, she got on his back, and i should just think they went briskly along.
so when they got there, they went into the west wind's house, and the east wind said the lassie he had brought was the one who ought to have had the prince who lived in the castle east of the sun and west of the moon; and so she had set out to seek him, and how he had come with her, and would be glad to know if the west wind knew how to get to the castle.
"nay," said the west wind, "so far i've never blown; but if you will, i'll go with you to our brother the south wind, for he's much stronger than either of us, and he has flapped his wings far and wide. maybe he'll tell you. you can get on my back, and i'll carry you to him."
yes! she got on his back, and so they travelled to the south wind, and weren't so very long on the way, i should think.
when they got there, the west wind asked him if he could tell her the way to the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon, for it was she who ought to have had the prince who lived there.
"you don't say so! that's she, is it?" said the south wind.
"well, i have blustered about in most places in my time, but so far have i never blown; but if you will, i'll take you to my brother the north wind; he is the oldest and strongest of the whole lot of us, and if he don't know where it is, you'll never find any one in the world to tell you. you can get on my back, and i'll carry you thither."
yes! she got on his back, and away he went from his house at a fine rate. and this time, too, she wasn't long on her way.
so when they got to the north wind's house, he was so wild and cross, cold puffs came from him a long way off.
"blast you both, what do you want?" he roared out to them ever so far off, so that it struck them with an icy shiver.
"well," said the south wind, "you needn't be so foul-mouthed, for here i am, your brother, the south wind, and here is the lassie who ought to have had the prince who dwells in the castle that lies east of the sun and west of the moon, and now she wants to ask you if you ever were there, and can tell her the way, for she would be so glad to find him again."
"yes, i know well enough where it is," said the north wind; "once in my life i blew an aspen-leaf thither, but, i was so tired i couldn't blow a puff for ever so many days, after. but if you really wish to go thither, and aren't afraid to come along with me, i'll take you on my back and see if i can blow you thither."
yes! with all her heart; she must and would get thither if it were possible in any way; and as for fear, however madly he went, she wouldn't be at all afraid.
"very well, then," said the north wind, "but you must sleep here to-night, for we must have the whole day before us, if we're to get thither at all."
early next morning the north wind woke her, and puffed himself up, and blew himself out, and made himself so stout and big, 'twas gruesome to look at him; and so off they went high up through the air, as if they would never stop till they got to the world's end.
down here below there was such a storm; it threw down long tracts of wood and many houses, and when it swept over the great sea, ships foundered by hundreds.
so they tore on and on no one can believe how far they went and all the while they still went over the sea, and the north wind got more and more weary, and so out of breath he could scarce bring out a puff, and his wings drooped and drooped, till at last he sunk so low that the crests of the waves dashed over his heels.
"are you afraid?" said the north wind.
"no!" she wasn't.
but they weren't very far from land; and the north wind had still so much strength left in him that he managed to throw her up on the shore under the windows of the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon; but then he was so weak and worn out, he had to stay there and rest many days before he could get home again.
next morning the lassie sat down under the castle window, and began to play with the gold apple; and the first person she saw was the long-nose who was to have the prince.
"what do you want for your gold apple, you lassie?" said the long-nose, and threw up the window.
"it's not for sale, for gold or money," said the lassie.
"if it's not for sale for gold or money, what is it that you will sell it for? you may name your own price," said the princess.
"well! if i may get to the prince, who lives here, and be with him to-night, you shall have it," said the lassie whom the north wind had brought.
yes! she might; that could be done. so the princess got the gold apple; but when the lassie came up to the prince's bed-room at night he was fast asleep; she called him and shook him, and between whiles she wept sore; but all she could do she couldn't wake him up. next morning, as soon as day broke, came the princess with the long nose, and drove her out again.
so in the daytime she sat down under the castle windows and began to card with her carding-comb, and the same thing happened. the princess asked what she wanted for it; and she said it wasn't for sale for gold or money, but if she might get leave to go up to the prince and be with him that night, the princess should have it.
but when she went up she found him fast asleep again, and all she called, and all she shook, and wept, and prayed, she couldn't get life into him; and as soon as the first gray peep of day came, then came the princess with the long nose, and chased her out again.
so, in the daytime, the lassie sat down outside under the castle window, and began to spin with her golden spinning-wheel, and that, too, the princess with the long nose wanted to have. so she threw up the window and asked what she wanted for it. the lassie said, as she had said twice before, it wasn't for sale for gold or money; but if she might go up to the prince who was there, and be with him alone that night, she might have it.
yes! she might do that and welcome. but now you must know there were some christian folk who had been carried off thither, and as they sat in their room, which was next the prince, they had heard how a woman had been in there, and wept and prayed, and called to him two nights running, and they told that to the prince.
that evening, when the princess came with her sleepy drink, the prince made as if he drank, but threw it over his shoulder, for he could guess it was a sleepy drink. so, when the lassie came in, she found the prince wide awake; and then she told him the whole story how she had come thither.
"ah," said the prince, "you've just come in the very nick of time, for to-morrow is to be our wedding-day; but now i won't have the long-nose, and you are the only woman in the world who can set me free. i'll say i want to see what my wife is fit for, and beg her to wash the shirt which has the three spots of tallow on it; she'll say yes, for she doesn't know 'tis you who put them there; but that's a work only for christian folk, and not for such a pack of trolls, and so i'll say that i won't have any other for my bride than the woman who can wash them out, and ask you to do it."
so there was great joy and love between them all that night. but next day, when the wedding was to be, the prince said:
"first of all, i'd like to see what my bride is fit for."
"yes!" said the step-mother, with all her heart.
"well," said the prince, "i've got a fine shirt which i'd like for my wedding shirt, but somehow or other it has got three spots of tallow on it, which i must have washed out; and i have sworn never to take any other bride than the woman who's able to do that. if she can't, she's not worth having."
well, that was no great thing they said, so they agreed, and she with the long-nose began to wash away as hard as she could, but the more she rubbed and scrubbed, the bigger the spots grew.
"ah!" said the old hag, her mother, "you can't wash; let me try."
but she hadn't long taken the shirt in hand before it got far worse than ever, and with all her rubbing, and wringing, and scrubbing, the spots grew bigger and blacker, and the darker and uglier was the shirt.
then all the other trolls began to wash, but the longer it lasted, the blacker and uglier the shirt grew, till at last it was as black all over as if it had been up the chimney.
"ah!" said the prince, "you're none of you worth a straw; you can't wash. why there, outside, sits a beggar lassie, i'll be bound she knows how to wash better than the whole lot of you. come in, lassie!"
he shouted.
well, in she came.
"can you wash this shirt clean, lassie you?" said he.
"i don't know," she said, "but i think i can."
and almost before she had taken it and dipped it in the water, it was as white as driven snow, and whiter still.
"yes; you are the lassie for me," said the prince.
at that the old hag flew into such a rage, she burst on the spot, and the princess with the long nose after her, and the whole pack of trolls after her at least i've never heard a word about them since.
as for the prince and princess, they set free all the poor christian folk who had been carried off and shut up there; and they took with them all the silver and gold, and flitted away as far as they could from the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon.
the blue belt
once on a time there was an old beggar-woman, who had gone out to beg.
she had a little lad with her, and when she had got her bag full she struck across the hills towards her own home. so when they had gone a bit up the hill-side, they came upon a little blue belt which lay where two paths met, and the lad asked his mother's leave to pick it up.
"no," said she, "maybe there's witchcraft in it;" and so with threats she forced him to follow her. but when they had gone a bit further, the lad said he must turn aside a moment out of the road; and meanwhile his mother sat down on a tree-stump. but the lad was a long time gone, for as soon as he got so far into the wood that the old dame could not see him, he ran off to where the belt lay, took it up, tied it round his waist, and lo! he felt as strong as if he could lift the whole hill. when he got back, the old dame was in a great rage, and wanted to know what he had been doing all that while. "you don't care how much time you waste, and yet you know the night is drawing on, and we must cross the hill before it is dark!" so on they tramped; but when they had got about half-way, the old dame grew weary, and said she must rest under a bush.
"dear mother," said the lad, "mayn't i just go up to the top of this high crag while you rest, and try if i can't see some sign of folk hereabouts?"
yes! he might do that; so when he had got to the top he saw a light shining from the north. so he ran down and told his mother.
"we must get on, mother; we are near a house, for i see a bright light shining quite close to us in the north." then she rose and shouldered her bag, and set off to see; but they hadn't gone far, before there stood a steep spur of the hill, right across their path.
"just as i thought!" said the old dame, "now we can't go a step farther; a pretty bed we shall have here!"
but the lad took the bag under one arm, and his mother under the other, and ran straight up the steep crag with them.
"now, don't you see? don't you see that we are close to a house? don't you see that bright light?"
but the old dame said those were no christian folk, but trolls, for she was at home in all that forest far and near, and knew there was not a living soul in it, until you were well over the ridge and had come down on the other side. but they went on, and in a little while they came to a great house which was all painted red.
"what's the good?" said the old dame. "we daren't go in, for here the trolls live."
"don't say so; we must go in. there must be men where the lights shine so," said the lad. so in he went, and his mother after him, but he had scarce opened the door before she swooned away, for there she saw a great stout man, at least twenty feet high, sitting on the bench.
"good evening, grandfather!" said the lad.
"well, here i've sat three hundred years," said the man who sat on the bench, "and no one has ever come and called me grandfather before."
then the lad sat down by the man's side, and began to talk to him as if they had been old friends.
"but what's come over your mother?" said the man, after they had chatted a while. "i think she swooned away; you had better look after her."
so the lad went and took hold of the old dame, and dragged her up the hall along the floor. that brought her to herself, and she kicked and scratched, and flung herself about, and at last sat down upon a heap of firewood in the corner; but she was so frightened that she scarce dared to look one in the face.
after a while, the lad asked if they could spend the night there.
"yes, to be sure," said the man.
so they went on talking again, but the lad soon got hungry, and wanted to know if they could get food as well as lodging.
"of course," said the man, "that might be got too." and after he had sat a while longer, he rose up and threw six loads of dry pitch-pine on the fire. this made the old hag still more afraid.
"oh! now he's going to roast us alive," she said, in the corner where she sat.
and when the wood had burned down to glowing embers, up got the man and strode out of his house.
"heaven bless and help us! what a stout heart you have got!" said the old dame. "don't you see we have got amongst trolls?"
"stuff and nonsense!" said the lad; "no harm if we have."
in a little while, back came the man with an ox so fat and big, the lad had never seen its like, and he gave it one blow with his fist under the ear, and down it fell dead on the floor. when that was done, he took it up by all the four legs and laid it on the glowing embers, and turned it and twisted it about till it was burnt brown outside.
after that, he went to a cupboard and took out a great silver dish, and laid the ox on it; and the dish was so big that none of the ox hung over on any side. this he put on the table, and then he went down into the cellar and fetched a cask of wine, knocked out the head, and put the cask on the table, together with two knives, which were each six feet long. when this was done he bade them go and sit down to supper and eat. so they went, the lad first and the old dame after, but she began to whimper and wail, and to wonder how she should ever use such knives. but her son seized one, and began to cut slices out of the thigh of the ox, which he placed before his mother. and when they had eaten a bit, he took up the cask with both hands, and lifted it down to the floor; then he told his mother to come and drink, but it was still so high she couldn't reach up to it; so he caught her up, and held her up to the edge of the cask while she drank; as for himself, he clambered up and hung down like a cat inside the cask while he drank. so when he had quenched his thirst, he took up the cask and put it back on the table, and thanked the man for the good meal, and told his mother to come and thank him too, and, a-feared though she was, she dared do nothing else but thank the man. then the lad sat down again alongside the man and began to gossip, and after they had sat a while the man said:
"well! i must just go and get a bit of supper too;" and so he went to the table and ate up the whole ox hoofs, and horns, and all and drained the cask to the last drop, and then went back and sat on the bench.
"as for beds," he said, "i don't know what's to be done. i've only got one bed and a cradle; but we could get on pretty well if you would sleep in the cradle, and then your mother might lie in the bed yonder."
"thank you kindly, that'll do nicely," said the lad; and with that he pulled off his clothes and lay down in the cradle; but, to tell you the truth, it was quite as big as a four-poster. as for the old dame, she had to follow the man who showed her to bed, though she was out of her wits for fear.
"well!" thought the lad to himself, "'twill never do to go to sleep yet. i'd best lie awake and listen how things go as the night wears on."
so, after a while, the man began to talk to the old dame, and at last he said:
"we two might live here so happily together, could we only be rid of this son of yours."
"but do you know how to settle him? is that what you're thinking of?"
said she.
"nothing easier," said he; at any rate he would try. he would just say he wished the old dame would stay and keep house for him a day or two, and then he would take the lad out with him up the hill to quarry corner-stones, and roll down a great rock on him. all this the lad lay and listened to.
next day the troll for it was a troll as clear as day asked if the old dame would stay and keep house for him a few days; and as the day went on he took a great iron crowbar, and asked the lad if he had a mind to go with him up the hill and quarry a few corner-stones. with all his heart, he said, and went with him; and so, after they had split a few stones, the troll wanted him to go down below and look after cracks in the rock; and while he was doing this the troll worked away, and wearied himself with his crowbar till he moved a whole crag out of its bed, which came rolling right down on the place where the lad was; but he held it up till he could get on one side, and then let it roll on.
"oh!" said the lad to the troll, "now i see what you mean to do with me. you want to crush me to death; so just go down yourself and look after the cracks and refts in the rock, and i'll stand up above."
the troll did not dare to do otherwise than the lad bade him, and the end of it was that the lad rolled down a great rock, which fell upon the troll and broke one of his thighs.
"well! you are in a sad plight," said the lad, as he strode down, lifted up the rock, and set the man free. after that he had to put him on his back and carry him home; so he ran with him as fast as a horse, and shook him so that the troll screamed and screeched as if a knife were run into him. and when he got home, they had to put the troll to bed, and there he lay in a sad pickle.
when the night wore on, the troll began to talk to the old dame again, and to wonder how ever they could be rid of the lad.
"well," said the old dame, "if you can't hit on a plan to get rid of him, i'm sure i can't."
"let me see," said the troll; "i've got twelve lions in a garden; if they could only get hold of the lad, they'd soon tear him to pieces."
so the old dame said it would be easy enough to get him there. she would sham sick, and say she felt so poorly, nothing would do her any good but lion's milk. all that the lad lay and listened to; and when he got up in the morning his mother said she was worse than she looked, and she thought she should never be right again unless she could get some lion's milk.
"then i'm afraid you'll be poorly a long time, mother," said the lad, "for i'm sure i don't know where any is to be got."
"oh! if that be all," said the troll, "there's no lack of lion's milk, if we only had the man to fetch it;" and then he went on to say how his brother had a garden with twelve lions in it, and how the lad might have the key if he had a mind to milk the lions. so the lad took the key and a milking pail, and strode off; and when he unlocked the gate and got into the garden, there stood all the twelve lions on their hind-paws, rampant and roaring at him. but the lad laid hold of the biggest, and led him about by the fore-paws, and dashed him against stocks and stones till there wasn't a bit of him left but the two paws. so when the rest saw that, they were so afraid that they crept up and lay at his feet like so many curs. after that they followed him about wherever he went, and when he got home, they lay down outside the house, with their fore-paws on the door sill.
"now, mother, you'll soon be well," said the lad, when he went in, "for here is the lion's milk."
he had just milked a drop in the pail.
but the troll, as he lay in bed, swore it was all a lie. he was sure the lad was not the man to milk lions.
when the lad heard that, he forced the troll to get out of bed, threw open the door, and all the lions rose up and seized the troll, and at last the lad had to make them leave their hold.
that night the troll began to talk to the old dame again. "i'm sure i can't tell how to put this lad out of the way he is so awfully strong; can't you think of some way?"
"no," said the old dame, "if you can't tell, i'm sure i can't."
"well!" said the troll, "i have two brothers in a castle; they are twelve times as strong as i am, and that's why i was turned out and had to put up with this farm. they hold that castle, and round it there is an orchard with apples in it, and whoever eats those apples sleeps for three days and three nights. if we could only get the lad to go for the fruit, he wouldn't be able to keep from tasting the apples, and as soon as ever he fell asleep my brothers would tear him in pieces."
the old dame said she would sham sick, and say she could never be herself again unless she tasted those apples; for she had set her heart on them.
all this the lad lay and listened to.
when the morning came the old dame was so poorly that she couldn't utter a word but groans and sighs. she was sure she should never be well again, unless she had some of those apples that grew in the orchard near the castle where the man's brothers lived; only she had no one to send for them.
oh! the lad was ready to go that instant; but the eleven lions went with him. so when he came to the orchard, he climbed up into the apple tree and ate as many apples as he could, and he had scarce got down before he fell into a deep sleep; but the lions all lay round him in a ring. the third day came the troll's brothers, but they did not come in man's shape. they came snorting like man-eating steeds, and wondered who it was that dared to be there, and said they would tear him to pieces, so small that there should not be a bit of him left.
but up rose the lions and tore the trolls into small pieces, so that the place looked as if a dung heap had been tossed about it; and when they had finished the trolls they lay down again. the lad did not wake till late in the afternoon, and when he got on his knees and rubbed the sleep out of his eyes, he began to wonder what had been going on, when he saw the marks of hoofs. but when he went towards the castle, a maiden looked out of a window who had seen all that had happened, and she said:
"you may thank your stars you weren't in that tussle, else you must have lost your life."
"what! i lose my life! no fear of that, i think," said the lad.
so she begged him to come in, that she might talk with him, for she hadn't seen a christian soul ever since she came there. but when she opened the door the lions wanted to go in too, but she got so frightened that she began to scream, and so the lad let them lie outside. then the two talked and talked, and the lad asked how it came that she, who was so lovely, could put up with those ugly trolls. she never wished it, she said; 'twas quite against her will.
they had seized her by force, and she was the king of arabia's daughter. so they talked on, and at last she asked him what he would do; whether she should go back home, or whether he would have her to wife. of course he would have her, and she shouldn't go home.
after that they went round the castle, and at last they came to a great hall, where the trolls' two great swords hung high up on the wall.
"i wonder if you are man enough to wield one of these," said the princess.
"who? i?" said the lad. "'twould be a pretty thing if i couldn't wield one of these."
with that he put two or three chairs one a-top of the other, jumped up, and touched the biggest sword with his finger tips, tossed it up in the air, and caught it again by the hilt; leapt down, and at the same time dealt such a blow with it on the floor that the whole hall shook. after he had thus got down, he thrust the sword under his arm and carried it about with him.
so, when they had lived a little while in the castle, the princess thought she ought to go home to her parents, and let them know what had become of her; so they loaded a ship, and she set sail from the castle.
after she had gone, and the lad had wandered about a little, he called to mind that he had been sent out on an errand thither, and had come to fetch something for his mother's health; and though he said to himself, "after all the old dame was not so bad but she's all right by this time" still he thought he ought to go and just see how she was.
so he went and found both the man and his mother quite fresh and hearty.
"what wretches you are to live in this beggarly hut," said the lad.
"come with me up to my castle, and you shall see what a fine fellow i am."
well! they were both ready to go, and on the way his mother talked to him, and asked how it was he had got so strong.
"if you must know it came of that blue belt which lay on the hill-side that time when you and i were out begging," said the lad.
"have you got it still?" asked she.
"yes" he had. it was tied round his waist.
"might she see it?"
"yes" she might; and with that he pulled open his waistcoat and shirt to show it to her.
then she seized it with both hands, tore it off, and twisted it round her fist.
"now," she cried, "what shall i do with such a wretch as you? i'll just give you one blow, and dash your brains out!"
"far too good a death for such a scamp," said the troll. "no! let's first burn out his eyes, and then turn him adrift in a little boat."
so they burned out his eyes and turned him adrift, in spite of his prayers and tears; but, as the boat drifted, the lions swam after, and at last they laid hold of it and dragged it ashore on an island, and placed the lad under a fir tree. they caught game for him, and they plucked the birds and made him a bed of down; but he was forced to eat his meat raw and he was blind. at last, one day the biggest lion was chasing a hare which was blind, for it ran straight over stock and stone, and the end was, it ran right up against a fir-stump and tumbled head over heels across the field right into a spring; but lo!
when it came out of the spring it saw its way quite plain, and so saved its life.
"so, so!" thought the lion, and went and dragged the lad to the spring, and dipped him over head and ears in it. so, when he had got his sight again, he went down to the shore and made signs to the lions that they should all lie close together like a raft; then he stood upon their backs while they swam with him to the mainland. when he had reached the shore he went up into a birchen copse, and made the lions lie quiet. then he stole up to the castle, like a thief, to see if he couldn't lay hands on his belt; and when he got to the door, he peeped through the keyhole, and there he saw his belt hanging up over a door in the kitchen. so he crept softly in across the floor, for there was no one there; but as soon as he had got hold of the belt, he began to kick and stamp about as though he were mad. just then his mother came rushing out:
"dear heart, my darling little boy! do give me the belt again," she said.
"thank you kindly," said he. "now you shall have the doom you passed on me," and he fulfilled it on the spot. when the old troll heard that, he came in and begged and prayed so prettily that he might not be smitten to death.
"well, you may live," said the lad, "but you shall undergo the same punishment you gave me;" and so he burned out the troll's eyes, and turned him adrift on the sea in a little boat, but he had no lions to follow him.
now the lad was all alone, and he went about longing and longing for the princess; at last he could bear it no longer; he must set out to seek her, his heart was so bent on having her. so he loaded four ships and set sail for arabia.
for some time they had fair wind and fine weather, but after that they lay wind-bound under a rocky island. so the sailors went ashore and strolled about to spend the time, and there they found a huge egg, almost as big as a little house. so they began to knock it about with large stones, but, after all, they couldn't crack the shell. then the lad came up with his sword to see what all the noise was about, and when he saw the egg, he thought it a trifle to crack it; so he gave it one blow and the egg split, and out came a chicken as big as an elephant.
"now we have done wrong," said the lad; "this can cost us all our lives;" and then he asked his sailors if they were men enough to sail to arabia in four-and-twenty hours if they got a fine breeze. yes!
they were good to do that, they said, so they set sail with a fine breeze, and got to arabia in three-and-twenty hours. as soon as they landed, the lad ordered all the sailors to go and bury themselves up to the eyes in a sandhill, so that they could barely see the ships.
the lad and the captains climbed a high crag and sate down under a fir.
in a little while came a great bird flying with an island in its claws, and let it fall down on the fleet, and sunk every ship. after it had done that, it flew up to the sandhill and flapped its wings, so that the wind nearly took off the heads of the sailors, and it flew past the fir with such force that it turned the lad right about, but he was ready with his sword, and gave the bird one blow and brought it down dead.
after that he went to the town, where every one was glad because the king had got his daughter back; but now the king had hidden her away somewhere himself, and promised her hand as a reward to any one who could find her, and this though she was betrothed before. now as the lad went along he met a man who had white bear-skins for sale, so he bought one of the hides and put it on; and one of the captains was to take an iron chain and lead him about, and so he went into the town and began to play pranks. at last the news came to the king's ears, that there never had been such fun in the town before, for here was a white bear that danced and cut capers just as it was bid. so a messenger came to say the bear must come to the castle at once, for the king wanted to see its tricks. so when it got to the castle every one was afraid, for such a beast they had never seen before; but the captain said there was no danger unless they laughed at it. they mustn't do that, else it would tear them to pieces. when the king heard that, he warned all the court not to laugh. but while the fun was going on, in came one of the king's maids, and began to laugh and make game of the bear, and the bear flew at her and tore her, so that there was scarce a rag of her left. then all the court began to bewail, and the captain most of all.
"stuff and nonsense," said the king; "she's only a maid, besides it's more my affair than yours."
when the show was over, it was late at night. "it's no good your going away, when it's so late," said the king. "the bear had best sleep here."
"perhaps it might sleep in the ingle by the kitchen fire," said the captain.
"nay," said the king, "it shall sleep up here, and it shall have pillows and cushions to sleep on." so a whole heap of pillows and cushions was brought, and the captain had a bed in a side room.
but at midnight the king came with a lamp in his hand and a big bunch of keys, and carried off the white bear. he passed along gallery after gallery through doors and rooms, up-stairs and down-stairs, till at last he came to a pier which ran out into the sea. then the king began to pull and haul at posts and pins, this one up and that one down, till at last a little house floated up to the water's edge.
there he kept his daughter, for she was so dear to him that he had hid her, so that no one could find her out. he left the white bear outside while he went in and told her how it had danced and played its pranks.
she said she was afraid, and dared not look at it; but he talked her over, saying there was no danger if she only wouldn't laugh. so they brought the bear in, and locked the door, and it danced and played its tricks; but just when the fun was at its height, the princess's maid began to laugh. then the lad flew at her and tore her to bits, and the princess began to cry and sob.
"stuff and nonsense," cried the king; "all this fuss about a maid!
i'll get you just as good a one again. but now i think the bear had best stay here till morning, for i don't care to have to go and lead it along all those galleries and stairs at this time of night."
"well!" said the princess, "if it sleeps here, i'm sure i won't."
but just then the bear curled himself up and lay down by the stove; and it was settled at last that the princess should sleep there too, with a light burning. but as soon as the king had well gone, the white bear came and begged her to undo his collar. the princess was so scared she almost swooned away; but she felt about till she found the collar, and she had scarce undone it before the bear pulled his head off. then she knew him again, and was so glad there was no end to her joy, and she wanted to tell her father at once that her deliverer was come. but the lad would not hear of it; he would earn her once more, he said. so in the morning when they heard the king rattling at the posts outside, the lad drew on the hide and lay down by the stove.
"well, has it lain still?" the king asked.
"i should think so," said the princess; "it hasn't so much as turned or stretched itself once."
when they got up to the castle again, the captain took the bear and led it away, and then the lad threw off the hide, and went to a tailor and ordered clothes fit for a prince; and when they were fitted on he went to the king, and said he wanted to find the princess.
"you're not the first who has wished the same thing," said the king, "but they have all lost their lives; for if any one who tries can't find her in four-and-twenty hours his life is forfeited."
yes; the lad knew all that. still he wished to try, and if he couldn't find her, 'twas his look-out. now in the castle there was a band that played sweet tunes, and there were fair maids to dance with, and so the lad danced away.
when twelve hours were gone, the king said:
"i pity you with all my heart. you're so poor a hand at seeking; you will surely lose your life."
"stuff!" said the lad; "while there's life there's hope! so long as there's breath in the body there's no fear; we have lots of time!" and so he went on dancing till there was only one hour left.
then he said he would begin to search.
"it's no use now," said the king; "time's up."
"light your lamp; out with your big bunch of keys," said the lad, "and follow me whither i wish to go. there is still a whole hour left."
so the lad went the same way which the king had led him the night before, and he bade the king unlock door after door till they came down to the pier which ran out into the sea.
"it's all no use, i tell you," said the king; "time's up, and this will only lead you right out into the sea."
"still five minutes more," said the lad, as he pulled and pushed at the posts and pins, and the house floated up.
"now the time is up," bawled the king; "come hither, headsman, and take off his head."
"nay, nay!" said the lad; "stop a bit, there are still three minutes!
out with the key, and let me get into this house."
but there stood the king and fumbled with his keys, to draw out the time. at last he said he hadn't any key.
"well, if you haven't, i have," said the lad, as he gave the door such a kick that it flew to splinters inwards on the floor.
at the door the princess met him, and told her father this was her deliverer, on whom her heart was set. so she had him; and this was how the beggar boy came to marry the daughter of the king of arabia.
prince lindworm
once upon a time, there was a fine young king who was married to the loveliest of queens. they were exceedingly happy, all but for one thing they had no children. and this often made them both sad, because the queen wanted a dear little child to play with, and the king wanted an heir to the kingdom.
one day the queen went out for a walk by herself, and she met an ugly old woman. the old woman was just like a witch: but she was a nice kind of witch, not the cantankerous sort. she said, "why do you look so doleful, pretty lady?" "it's no use my telling you," answered the queen, "nobody in the world can help me." "oh, you never know,"
said the old woman. "just you let me hear what your trouble is, and maybe i can put things right."
"my dear woman, how can you?" said the queen: and she told her, "the king and i have no children: that's why i am so distressed." "well, you needn't be," said the old witch. "i can set that right in a twinkling, if only you will do exactly as i tell you. listen.
to-night, at sunset, take a little drinking-cup with two ears" (that is, handles), "and put it bottom upwards on the ground in the north-west corner of your garden. then go and lift it up to-morrow morning at sunrise, and you will find two roses underneath it, one red and one white. if you eat the red rose, a little boy will be born to you: if you eat the white rose, a little girl will be sent. but, whatever you do, you mustn't eat both the roses, or you'll be sorry, that i warn you! only one: remember that!" "thank you a thousand times," said the queen, "this is good news indeed!" and she wanted to give the old woman her gold ring; but the old woman wouldn't take it.
so the queen went home and did as she had been told: and next morning at sunrise she stole out into the garden and lifted up the little drinking-cup. she was surprised, for indeed she had hardly expected to see anything. but there were the two roses underneath it, one red and one white. and now she was dreadfully puzzled, for she did not know which to choose. "if i choose the red one," she thought, "and i have a little boy, he may grow up and go to the wars and get killed.
but if i choose the white one, and have a little girl, she will stay at home awhile with us, but later on she will get married and go away and leave us. so, whichever it is, we may be left with no child after all."
however, at last she decided on the white rose, and she ate it. and it tasted so sweet, that she took and ate the red one too: without ever remembering the old woman's solemn warning.
some time after this, the king went away to the wars: and while he was still away, the queen became the mother of twins. one was a lovely baby-boy, and the other was a lindworm, or serpent. she was terribly frightened when she saw the lindworm, but he wriggled away out of the room, and nobody seemed to have seen him but herself: so that she thought it must have been a dream. the baby prince was so beautiful and so healthy, the queen was full of joy: and likewise, as you may suppose, was the king when he came home and found his son and heir. not a word was said by anyone about the lindworm: only the queen thought about it now and then.
many days and years passed by, and the baby grew up into a handsome young prince, and it was time that he got married. the king sent him off to visit foreign kingdoms, in the royal coach, with six white horses, to look for a princess grand enough to be his wife. but at the very first cross-roads, the way was stopped by an enormous lindworm, enough to frighten the bravest. he lay in the middle of the road with a great wide open mouth, and cried, "a bride for me before a bride for you!" then the prince made the coach turn round and try another road: but it was all no use. for, at the first cross-ways, there lay the lindworm again, crying out, "a bride for me before a bride for you!" so the prince had to turn back home again to the castle, and give up his visits to the foreign kingdoms. and his mother, the queen, had to confess that what the lindworm said was true. for he was really the eldest of her twins: and so he ought to have a wedding first.
there seemed nothing for it but to find a bride for the lindworm, if his younger brother, the prince, were to be married at all. so the king wrote to a distant country, and asked for a princess to marry his son (but, of course, he didn't say which son), and presently a princess arrived. but she wasn't allowed to see her bridegroom until he stood by her side in the great hall and was married to her, and then, of course, it was too late for her to say she wouldn't have him.
but next morning the princess had disappeared. the lindworm lay sleeping all alone: and it was quite plain that he had eaten her.
a little while after, the prince decided that he might now go journeying again in search of a princess. and off he drove in the royal chariot with the six white horses. but at the first cross-ways, there lay the lindworm, crying with his great wide open mouth, "a bride for me before a bride for you!" so the carriage tried another road, and the same thing happened, and they had to turn back again this time, just as formerly. and the king wrote to several foreign countries, to know if anyone would marry his son. at last another princess arrived, this time from a very far distant land. and, of course, she was not allowed to see her future husband before the wedding took place, and then, lo and behold! it was the lindworm who stood at her side. and next morning the princess had disappeared:
and the lindworm lay sleeping all alone; and it was quite clear that he had eaten her.
by and by the prince started on his quest for the third time: and at the first cross-roads there lay the lindworm with his great wide open mouth, demanding a bride as before. and the prince went straight back to the castle, and told the king: "you must find another bride for my elder brother."
"i don't know where i am to find her," said the king, "i have already made enemies of two great kings who sent their daughters here as brides: and i have no notion how i can obtain a third lady. people are beginning to say strange things, and i am sure no princess will dare to come."
now, down in a little cottage near a wood, there lived the king's shepherd, an old man with his only daughter. and the king came one day and said to him, "will you give me your daughter to marry my son the lindworm? and i will make you rich for the rest of your life." "no, sire," said the shepherd, "that i cannot do. she is my only child, and i want her to take care of me when i am old. besides, if the lindworm would not spare two beautiful princesses, he won't spare her either. he will just gobble her up: and she is much too good for such a fate."
but the king wouldn't take "no" for an answer: and at last the old man had to give in.
well, when the old shepherd told his daughter that she was to be prince lindworm's bride, she was utterly in despair. she went out into the woods, crying and wringing her hands and bewailing her hard fate. and while she wandered to and fro, an old witch-woman suddenly appeared out of a big hollow oak-tree, and asked her, "why do you look so doleful, pretty lass?" the shepherd-girl said, "it's no use my telling you, for nobody in the world can help me." "oh, you never know," said the old woman. "just you let me hear what your trouble is, and maybe i can put things right." "ah, how can you?" said the girl, "for i am to be married to the king's eldest son, who is a lindworm. he has already married two beautiful princesses, and devoured them: and he will eat me too! no wonder i am distressed."
"well, you needn't be," said the witch-woman. "all that can be set right in a twinkling: if only you will do exactly as i tell you." so the girl said she would.
"listen, then," said the old woman. "after the marriage ceremony is over, and when it is time for you to retire to rest, you must ask to be dressed in ten snow-white shifts. and you must then ask for a tub full of lye," (that is, washing water prepared with wood-ashes) "and a tub full of fresh milk, and as many whips as a boy can carry in his arms, and have all these brought into your bed-chamber. then, when the lindworm tells you to shed a shift, do you bid him slough a skin. and when all his skins are off, you must dip the whips in the lye and whip him; next, you must wash him in the fresh milk; and, lastly, you must take him and hold him in your arms, if it's only for one moment."
"the last is the worst notion ugh!" said the shepherd's daughter, and she shuddered at the thought of holding the cold, slimy, scaly lindworm.
"do just as i have said, and all will go well," said the old woman.
then she disappeared again in the oak-tree.
when the wedding-day arrived, the girl was fetched in the royal chariot with the six white horses, and taken to the castle to be decked as a bride. and she asked for ten snow-white shifts to be brought her, and the tub of lye, and the tub of milk, and as many whips as a boy could carry in his arms. the ladies and courtiers in the castle thought, of course, that this was some bit of peasant superstition, all rubbish and nonsense. but the king said, "let her have whatever she asks for." she was then arrayed in the most wonderful robes, and looked the loveliest of brides. she was led to the hall where the wedding ceremony was to take place, and she saw the lindworm for the first time as he came in and stood by her side. so they were married, and a great wedding-feast was held, a banquet fit for the son of a king.
when the feast was over, the bridegroom and bride were conducted to their apartment, with music, and torches, and a great procession. as soon as the door was shut, the lindworm turned to her and said, "fair maiden, shed a shift!" the shepherd's daughter answered him, "prince lindworm, slough a skin!" "no one has ever dared tell me to do that before!" said he. "but i command you to do it now!" said she.
then he began to moan and wriggle: and in a few minutes a long snake-skin lay upon the floor beside him. the girl drew off her first shift, and spread it on top of the skin.
the lindworm said again to her, "fair maiden, shed a shift."
the shepherd's daughter answered him, "prince lindworm, slough a skin."
"no one has ever dared tell me to do that before," said he. "but i command you to do it now," said she. then with groans and moans he cast off the second skin: and she covered it with her second shift.
the lindworm said for the third time, "fair maiden, shed a shift."
the shepherd's daughter answered him again, "prince lindworm, slough a skin." "no one has ever dared tell me to do that before," said he, and his little eyes rolled furiously. but the girl was not afraid, and once more she commanded him to do as she bade.
and so this went on until nine lindworm skins were lying on the floor, each of them covered with a snow-white shift. and there was nothing left of the lindworm but a huge thick mass, most horrible to see. then the girl seized the whips, dipped them in the lye, and whipped him as hard as ever she could. next, she bathed him all over in the fresh milk. lastly, she dragged him on to the bed and put her arms round him. and she fell fast asleep that very moment.
next morning very early, the king and the courtiers came and peeped in through the keyhole. they wanted to know what had become of the girl, but none of them dared enter the room. however, in the end, growing bolder, they opened the door a tiny bit. and there they saw the girl, all fresh and rosy, and beside her lay no lindworm, but the handsomest prince that any one could wish to see.
the king ran out and fetched the queen: and after that, there were such rejoicings in the castle as never were known before or since. the wedding took place all over again, much finer than the first, with festivals and banquets and merrymakings for days and weeks. no bride was ever so beloved by a king and queen as this peasant maid from the shepherd's cottage. there was no end to their love and their kindness towards her: because, by her sense and her calmness and her courage, she had saved their son, prince lindworm.
the lassie and her godmother
once on a time a poor couple lived far, far away in a great wood. the wife was brought to bed, and had a pretty girl, but they were so poor they did not know how to get the babe christened, for they had no money to pay the parson's fees. so one day the father went out to see if he could find any one who was willing to stand for the child and pay the fees; but though he walked about the whole day from one house to another, and though all said they were willing enough to stand, no one thought himself bound to pay the fees. now, when he was going home again, a lovely lady met him, dressed so fine, and she looked so thoroughly good and kind; she offered to get the babe christened, but after that, she said, she must keep it for her own. the husband answered, he must first ask his wife what she wished to do; but when he got home and told his story, the wife said, right out, "no!"
next day the man went out again, but no one would stand if they had to pay the fees; and though he begged and prayed, he could get no help.
and again as he went home, towards evening the same lovely lady met him, who looked so sweet and good, and she made him the same offer. so he told his wife again how he had fared, and this time she said, if he couldn't get any one to stand for his babe next day, they must just let the lady have her way, since she seemed so kind and good.
the third day, the man went about, but he couldn't get any one to stand; and so when, towards evening, he met the kind lady again, he gave his word she should have the babe if she would only get it christened at the font. so next morning she came to the place where the man lived, followed by two men to stand godfathers, took the babe and carried it to church, and there it was christened. after that she took it to her own house, and there the little girl lived with her several years, and her foster-mother was always kind and friendly to her.
now, when the lassie had grown to be big enough to know right and wrong, her foster-mother got ready to go on a journey.
"you have my leave," she said, "to go all over the house, except those rooms which i shew you;" and when she had said that, away she went.
but the lassie could not forbear just to open one of the doors a little bit, when pop! out flew a star.
when her foster-mother came back, she was very vexed to find that the star had flown out, and she got very angry with her foster-daughter, and threatened to send her away; but the child cried and begged so hard that she got leave to stay.
now, after a while, the foster-mother had to go on another journey; and, before she went, she forbade the lassie to go into those two rooms into which she had never been. she promised to beware; but when she was left alone, she began to think and to wonder what there could be in the second room, and at last she could not help setting the door a little ajar, just to peep in, when pop! out flew the moon.
when her foster-mother came home and found the moon let out, she was very downcast, and said to the lassie she must go away, she could not stay with her any longer. but the lassie wept so bitterly, and prayed so heartily for forgiveness, that this time, too, she got leave to stay.
some time after, the foster-mother had to go away again, and she charged the lassie, who by this time was half grown up, most earnestly that she mustn't try to go into, or to peep into, the third room. but when her foster-mother had been gone some time, and the lassie was weary of walking about alone, all at once she thought, "dear me, what fun it would be just to peep a little into that third room." then she thought she mustn't do it for her foster-mother's sake; but when the bad thought came the second time she could hold out no longer; come what might, she must and would look into the room; so she just opened the door a tiny bit, when pop! out flew the sun.
but when her foster-mother came back and saw that the sun had flown away, she was cut to the heart, and said, "now, there was no help for it, the lassie must and should go away; she couldn't hear of her staying any longer." now the lassie cried her eyes out, and begged and prayed so prettily; but it was all no good.
"nay! but i must punish you!" said her foster-mother; "but you may have your choice, either to be the loveliest woman in the world, and not to be able to speak, or to keep your speech, and to be the ugliest of all women; but away from me you must go."
and the lassie said, "i would sooner be lovely." so she became all at once wondrous fair; but from that day forth she was dumb.
so, when she went away from her foster-mother, she walked and wandered through a great, great wood; but the farther she went, the farther off the end seemed to be. so, when the evening came on, she clomb up into a tall tree, which grew over a spring, and there she made herself up to sleep that night. close by lay a castle, and from that castle came early every morning a maid to draw water to make the prince's tea, from the spring over which the lassie was sitting. so the maid looked down into the spring, saw the lovely face in the water, and thought it was her own; then she flung away the pitcher, and ran home; and, when she got there, she tossed up her head and said, "if i'm so pretty, i'm far too good to go and fetch water."
so another maid had to go for the water, but the same thing happened to her; she went back and said she was far too pretty and too good to fetch water from the spring for the prince. then the prince went himself, for he had a mind to see what all this could mean. so, when he reached the spring, he too saw the image in the water; but he looked up at once, and became aware of the lovely lassie who sate there up in the tree. then he coaxed her down and took her home; and at last made up his mind to have her for his queen, because she was so lovely; but his mother, who was still alive, was against it.
"she can't speak," she said, "and maybe she's a wicked witch."
but the prince could not be content till he got her. so after they had lived together a while, the lassie was to have a child, and when the child came to be born, the prince set a strong watch about her; but at the birth one and all fell into a deep sleep, and her foster-mother came, cut the babe on its little finger, and smeared the queen's mouth with the blood; and said:
"now you shall be as grieved as i was when you let out the star;" and with these words she carried off the babe.
but when those who were on the watch woke, they thought the queen had eaten her own child, and the old queen was all for burning her alive, but the prince was so fond of her that at last he begged her off, but he had hard work to set her free.
so the next time the young queen was to have a child, twice as strong a watch was set as the first time, but the same thing happened over again, only this time her foster-mother said:
"now you shall be as grieved as i was when you let the moon out."
and the queen begged and prayed, and wept; for when her foster-mother was there, she could speak but it was all no good.
and now the old queen said she must be burnt, but the prince found means to beg her off. but when the third child was to be born, a watch was set three times as strong as the first, but just the same thing happened. her foster-mother came while the watch slept, took the babe, and cut its little finger, and smeared the queen's mouth with the blood, telling her now she should be as grieved as she had been when the lassie let out the sun.
and now the prince could not save her any longer. she must and should be burnt. but just as they were leading her to the stake, all at once they saw her foster-mother, who came with all three children two she led by the hand, and the third she had on her arm; and so she went up to the young queen and said:
"here are your children; now you shall have them again. i am the virgin mary, and so grieved as you have been, so grieved was i when you let out sun, and moon, and star. now you have been punished for what you did, and henceforth you shall have your speech."
how glad the queen and prince now were, all may easily think, but no one can tell. after that they were always happy; and from that day even the prince's mother was very fond of the young queen.
the husband who was to mind the house
once on a time there was a man, so surly and cross, he never thought his wife did anything right in the house. so, one evening, in haymaking time, he came home, scolding and swearing, and showing his teeth and making a dust.
"dear love, don't be so angry; there's a good man," said his goody; "to-morrow let's change our work. i'll go out with the mowers and mow, and you shall mind the house at home."
yes! the husband thought that would do very well. he was quite willing, he said.
so, early next morning, his goody took a scythe over her neck, and went out into the hayfield with the mowers, and began to mow; but the man was to mind the house, and do the work at home.
first of all, he wanted to churn the butter; but when he had churned a while, he got thirsty, and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of ale. so, just when he had knocked in the bung, and was putting the tap into the cask, he heard overhead the pig come into the kitchen. then off he ran up the cellar steps, with the tap in his hand, as fast as he could, to look after the pig, lest it should upset the churn; but when he got up, and saw the pig had already knocked the churn over, and stood there, routing and grunting amongst the cream which was running all over the floor, he got so wild with rage that he quite forgot the ale-barrel, and ran at the pig as hard as he could. he caught it, too, just as it ran out of doors, and gave it such a kick, that piggy lay for dead on the spot. then all at once he remembered he had the tap in his hand; but when he got down to the cellar, every drop of ale had run out of the cask.
then he went into the dairy and found enough cream left to fill the churn again, and so he began to churn, for butter they must have at dinner. when he had churned a bit, he remembered that their milking cow was still shut up in the byre, and hadn't had a bit to eat or a drop to drink all the morning, though the sun was high. then all at once he thought 'twas too far to take her down to the meadow, so he'd just get her up on the house top for the house, you must know, was thatched with sods, and a fine crop of grass was growing there. now the house lay close up against a steep down, and he thought if he laid a plank across to the thatch at the back he'd easily get the cow up.
but still he couldn't leave the churn, for there was his little babe crawling about on the floor, and "if i leave it," he thought, "the child is safe to upset it." so he took the churn on his back, and went out with it; but then he thought he'd better first water the cow before he turned her out on the thatch; so he took up a bucket to draw water out of the well; but, as he stooped down at the well's brink, all the cream ran out of the churn over his shoulders, and so down into the well.
now it was near dinner-time, and he hadn't even got the butter yet; so he thought he'd best boil the porridge, and filled the pot with water and hung it over the fire. when he had done that, he thought the cow might perhaps fall off the thatch and break her legs or her neck. so he got up on the house to tie her up. one end of the rope he made fast to the cow's neck and the other he slipped down the chimney and tied round his own thigh; and he had to make haste, for the water now began to boil in the pot, and he had still to grind the oatmeal.
so he began to grind away; but while he was hard at it, down fell the cow off the house-top after all, and as she fell, she dragged the man up the chimney by the rope. there he stuck fast; and as for the cow, she hung half-way down the wall, swinging between heaven and earth, for she could neither get down nor up.
and now the goody had waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her husband to come and call them home to dinner; but never a call they had. at last she thought she'd waited long enough, and went home. but when she got there and saw the cow hanging in such an ugly place, she ran up and cut the rope in two with her scythe. but, as she did this, down came her husband out of the chimney; and so, when his old dame came inside the kitchen, there she found him standing on his head in the porridge pot.
the lad who went to the north wind
once on a time there was an old widow who had one son; and as she was poorly and weak, her son had to go up into the safe to fetch meal for cooking; but when he got outside the safe, and was just going down the steps, there came the north wind puffing and blowing, caught up the meal, and so away with it through the air. then the lad went back into the safe for more; but when he came out again on the steps, if the north wind didn't come again and carry off the meal with a puff:
and, more than that, he did so the third time. at this the lad got very angry; and as he thought it hard that the north wind should behave so, he thought he'd just look him up, and ask him to give up his meal.
so off he went, but the way was long, and he walked and walked; but at last he came to the north wind's house.
"good day!" said the lad, "and thank you for coming to see us yesterday."
"good day!" answered the north wind, for his voice was loud and gruff, "and thanks for coming to see me. what do you want?"
"oh!" answered the lad, "i only wished to ask you to be so good as to let me have back that meal you took from me on the safe steps, for we haven't much to live on; and if you're to go on snapping up the morsel we have, there'll be nothing for it but to starve."
"i haven't got your meal," said the north wind; "but if you are in such need, i'll give you a cloth which will get you everything you want, if you only say, 'cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes!'"
with this the lad was well content. but, as the way was so long he couldn't get home in one day, so he turned into an inn on the way; and when they were going to sit down to supper he laid the cloth on a table which stood in the corner, and said:
"cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."
he had scarce said so before the cloth did as it was bid; and all who stood by thought it a fine thing, but most of all the landlady. so, when all were fast asleep at dead of night, she took the lad's cloth, and put another in its stead, just like the one he had got from the north wind, but which couldn't so much as serve up a bit of dry bread.
so, when the lad woke, he took his cloth and went off with it, and that day he got home to his mother.
"now," said he, "i've been to the north wind's house, and a good fellow he is, for he gave me this cloth, and when i only say to it, 'cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes,' i get any sort of food i please."
"all very true, i daresay," said his mother; "but seeing is believing, and i shan't believe it till i see it."
so the lad made haste, drew out a table, laid the cloth on it, and said:
"cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."
but never a bit of dry bread did the cloth serve up.
"well," said the lad "there's no help for it but to go to the north wind again;" and away he went.
so he came to where the north wind lived late in the afternoon.
"good evening!" said the lad.
"good evening!" said the north wind.
"i want my rights for that meal of ours which you took," said the lad; "for, as for that cloth i got, it isn't worth a penny."
"i've got no meal," said the north wind; "but yonder you have a ram which coins nothing but golden ducats as soon as you say to it: 'ram, ram! make money!'"
so the lad thought this a fine thing; but as it was too far to get home that day, he turned in for the night to the same inn where he had slept before.
before he called for anything, he tried the truth of what the north wind had said of the ram, and found it all right; but, when the landlord saw that, he thought it was a famous ram, and, when the lad had fallen asleep, he took another which couldn't coin gold ducats, and changed the two.
next morning off went the lad; and when he got home to his mother, he said:
"after all, the north wind is a jolly fellow; for now he has given me a ram which can coin golden ducats if i only say: 'ram, ram! make money!'"
"all very true, i daresay," said his mother; "but i shan't believe any such stuff until i see the ducats made."
"ram, ram! make money!" said the lad; but if the ram made anything, it wasn't money.
so the lad went back again to the north wind, and blew him up, and said the ram was worth nothing, and he must have his rights for the meal.
"well!" said the north wind; "i've nothing else to give you but that old stick in the corner yonder; but its a stick of that kind that if you say: 'stick, stick! lay on!' it lays on till you say: 'stick, stick! now stop!'"
so, as the way was long, the lad turned in this night too to the landlord; but as he could pretty well guess how things stood as to the cloth and the ram, he lay down at once on the bench and began to snore, as if he were asleep.
now the landlord, who easily saw that the stick must be worth something, hunted up one which was like it, and when he heard the lad snore, was going to change the two; but, just as the landlord was about to take it, the lad bawled out:
"stick, stick! lay on!"
so the stick began to beat the landlord, till he jumped over chairs, and tables, and benches, and yelled and roared:
"oh my! oh my! bid the stick be still, else it will beat me to death, and you shall have back both your cloth and your ram."
when the lad thought the landlord had got enough, he said:
"stick, stick! now stop!"
then he took the cloth and put it into his pocket, and went home with his stick in his hand, leading the ram by a cord round its horns; and so he got his rights for the meal he had lost.
the three princesses of whiteland
once on a time there was a fisherman who lived close by a palace, and fished for the king's table. one day when he was out fishing he just caught nothing. do what he would however he tried with bait and angle there was never a sprat on his hook. but when the day was far spent a head bobbed up out of the water, and said:
"if i may have what your wife bears under her girdle, you shall catch fish enough."
so the man answered boldly, "yes;" for he did not know that his wife was going to have a child. after that, as was like enough, he caught plenty of fish of all kinds. but when he got home at night and told his story, how he had got all that fish, his wife fell a-weeping and moaning, and was beside herself for the promise which her husband had made, for she said, "i bear a babe under my girdle."
well, the story soon spread, and came up to the castle; and when the king heard the woman's grief and its cause, he sent down to say he would take care of the child, and see if he couldn't save it.
so the months went on and on, and when her time came the fisher's wife had a boy; so the king took it at once, and brought it up as his own son, until the lad grew up. then he begged leave one day to go out fishing with his father; he had such a mind to go, he said. at first the king wouldn't hear of it, but at last the lad had his way, and went. so he and his father were out the whole day, and all went right and well till they landed at night. then the lad remembered he had left his handkerchief, and went to look for it; but as soon as ever he got into the boat, it began to move off with him at such speed that the water roared under the bow, and all the lad could do in rowing against it with the oars was no use; so he went and went the whole night, and at last he came to a white strand, far far away.
there he went ashore, and when he had walked about a bit, an old, old man met him, with a long white beard.
"what's the name of this land?" asked the lad.
"whiteland," said the man, who went on to ask the lad whence he came, and what he was going to do. so the lad told him all.
"aye, aye!" said the man; "now when you have walked a little farther along the strand here, you'll come to three princesses, whom you will see standing in the earth up to their necks, with only their heads out. then the first she is the eldest will call out and beg you so prettily to come and help her; and the second will do the same; to neither of these shall you go; make haste past them, as if you neither saw nor heard anything. but the third you shall go to, and do what she asks. if you do this, you'll have good luck that's all."
when the lad came to the first princess, she called out to him, and begged him so prettily to come to her, but he passed on as though he saw her not. in the same way he passed by the second; but to the third he went straight up.
"if you'll do what i bid you," she said, "you may have which of us you please."
"yes;" he was willing enough; so she told him how three trolls had set them down in the earth there; but before they had lived in the castle up among the trees.
"now," she said, "you must go into that castle, and let the trolls whip you each one night for each of us. if you can bear that, you'll set us free."
well, the lad said he was ready to try.
"when you go in," the princess went on to say, "you'll see two lions standing at the gate; but if you'll only go right in the middle between them they'll do you no harm. then go straight on into a little dark room, and make your bed. then the troll will come to whip you; but if you take the flask which hangs on the wall, and rub yourself with the ointment that's in it, wherever his lash falls, you'll be as sound as ever. then grasp the sword that hangs by the side of the flask and strike the troll dead."
yes, he did as the princess told him; he passed in the midst between the lions, as if he hadn't seen them, and went straight into the little room, and there he lay down to sleep. the first night there came a troll with three heads and three rods, and whipped the lad soundly; but he stood it till the troll was done; then he took the flask and rubbed himself, and grasped the sword and slew the troll.
so, when he went out next morning, the princesses stood out of the earth up to their waists.
the next night 'twas the same story over again, only this time the troll had six heads and six rods, and he whipped him far worse than the first; but when he went out next morning, the princesses stood out of the earth as far as the knee.
the third night there came a troll that had nine heads and nine rods, and he whipped and flogged the lad so long that he fainted away; then the troll took him up and dashed him against the wall; but the shock brought down the flask, which fell on the lad, burst, and spilled the ointment all over him, and so he became as strong and sound as ever again. then he wasn't slow; he grasped the sword and slew the troll; and next morning when he went out of the castle the princesses stood before him with all their bodies out of the earth.
so he took the youngest for his queen, and lived well and happily with her for some time.
at last he began to long to go home for a little to see his parents.
his queen did not like this; but at last his heart was so set on it, and he longed and longed so much, there was no holding him back, so she said:
"one thing you must promise me. this only to do what your father begs you to do, and not what mother wishes;" and that he promised.
then she gave him a ring, which was of that kind that any one who wore it might wish two wishes. so he wished himself home, and when he got home his parents could not wonder enough what a grand man their son had become.
now, when he had been at home some days, his mother wished him to go up to the palace and show the king what a fine fellow he had come to be. but his father said:
"no! don't let him do that; if he does, we shan't have any more joy of him this time."
but it was no good, the mother begged and prayed so long that at last he went. so when he got up to the palace he was far braver, both in clothes and array, than the other king, who didn't quite like this, and at last he said:
"all very fine; but here you can see my queen, what like she is, but i can't see yours: that i can't. do you know, i scarce think she's so good-looking as mine."
"would to heaven," said the young king, "she were standing here, then you'd see what she was like." and that instant there she stood before them.
but she was very woeful, and said to him:
"why did you not mind what i told you; and why did you not listen to what your father said? now, i must away home, and as for you, you have had both your wishes."
with that she knitted a ring among his hair with her name on it, and wished herself home, and was off.
then the young king was cut to the heart, and went, day out day in, thinking and thinking how he should get back to his queen. "i'll just try," he thought, "if i can't learn where whiteland lies;" and so he went out into the world to ask. so when he had gone a good way, he came to a high hill, and there he met one who was lord over all the beasts of the wood, for they all came home to him when he blew his horn; so the king asked if he knew where whiteland was.
"no, i don't," said he, "but i'll ask my beasts." then he blew his horn and called them, and asked if any of them knew where whiteland lay. but there was no beast that knew.
so the man gave him a pair of snow-shoes.
"when you get on these," he said, "you'll come to my brother, who lives hundreds of miles off; he is lord over all the birds of the air.
ask him. when you reach his house, just turn the shoes so that the toes point this way, and they'll come home of themselves." so when the king reached the house, he turned the shoes as the lord of the beasts had said, and away they went home of themselves.
so he asked again after whiteland, and the man called all the birds with a blast of his horn, and asked if any of them knew where whiteland lay; but none of the birds knew. now, long, long after the rest of the birds came an old eagle, which had been away ten round years, but he couldn't tell any more than the rest.
"well, well," said the man, "i'll lend you a pair of snow-shoes, and, when you get them on, they'll carry you to my brother, who lives hundreds of miles off; he's lord of all the fish in the sea; you'd better ask him. but don't forget to turn the toes of the shoes this way."
the king was full of thanks, got on the shoes, and when he came to the man who was lord over the fish of the sea, he turned the toes round, and so off they went home like the other pair. after that, he asked again after whiteland.
so the man called the fish with a blast, but no fish could tell where it lay. at last came an old pike, which they had great work to call home, he was such a way off. so when they asked him he said:
"know it? i should think i did! i've been cook there ten years, and to-morrow i'm going there again; for now the queen of whiteland, whose king is away, is going to wed another husband."
"well!" said the man, "as this is so, i'll give you a bit of advice.
hereabouts, on a moor, stand three brothers, and here they have stood these hundred years, fighting about a hat, a cloak, and a pair of boots. if any one has these three things he can make himself invisible, and wish himself anywhere he pleases. you can tell them you wish to try the things, and, after that, you'll pass judgment between them, whose they shall be."
yes! the king thanked the man, and went and did as he told him.
"what's all this?" he said to the brothers. "why do you stand here fighting for ever and a day? just let me try these things, and i'll give judgment whose they shall be."
they were very willing to do this; but, as soon as he had got the hat, cloak, and boots, he said:
"when we meet next time, i'll tell you my judgment," and with these words he wished himself away.
so as he went along up in the air, he came up with the north wind.
"whither away?" roared the north wind.
"to whiteland," said the king; and then he told him all that had befallen him.
"ah," said the north wind, "you go faster than i you do; for you can go straight, while i have to puff and blow round every turn and corner. but when you get there, just place yourself on the stairs by the side of the door, and then i'll come storming in, as though i were going to blow down the whole castle. and then when the prince, who is to have your queen, comes out to see what's the matter, just you take him by the collar and pitch him out of doors; then i'll look after him, and see if i can't carry him off."
well, the king did as the north wind said. he took his stand on the stairs, and when the north wind came, storming and roaring, and took hold of the castle wall, so that it shook again, the prince came out to see what was the matter. but as soon as ever he came, the king caught him by the collar and pitched him out of doors, and then the north wind caught him up and carried him off. so when there was an end of him, the king went into the castle, and at first his queen didn't know him, he was so wan and thin, through wandering so far and being so woeful; but when he shewed her the ring, she was as glad as glad could be; and so the rightful wedding was held, and the fame of it spread far and wide.
soria moria castle
once on a time there was a poor couple who had a son whose name was halvor. ever since he was a little boy he would turn his hand to nothing, but just sat there and groped about in the ashes. his father and mother often put him out to learn this trade or that, but halvor could stay nowhere; for, when he had been there a day or two, he ran away from his master, and never stopped till he was sitting again in the ingle, poking about in the cinders.
well, one day a skipper came, and asked halvor if he hadn't a mind to be with him, and go to sea, and see strange lands. yes, halvor would like that very much; so he wasn't long in getting himself ready.
how long they sailed i'm sure i can't tell; but the end of it was, they fell into a great storm, and when it was blown over, and it got still again, they couldn't tell where they were; for they had been driven away to a strange coast, which none of them knew anything about.
well, as there was just no wind at all, they stayed lying wind-bound there, and halvor asked the skipper's leave to go on shore and look about him; he would sooner go, he said, than lie there and sleep.
"do you think now you're fit to show yourself before folk," said the skipper, "why, you've no clothes but those rags you stand in?"
but halvor stuck to his own, and so at last he got leave, but he was to be sure and come back as soon as ever it began to blow. so off he went and found a lovely land; wherever he came there were fine large flat cornfields and rich meads, but he couldn't catch a glimpse of a living soul. well, it began to blow, but halvor thought he hadn't seen enough yet, and he wanted to walk a little farther just to see if he couldn't meet any folk. so after a while he came to a broad high road, so smooth and even, you might easily roll an egg along it.
halvor followed this, and when evening drew on he saw a great castle ever so far off, from which the sunbeams shone. so as he had now walked the whole day and hadn't taken a bit to eat with him, he was as hungry as a hunter, but still the nearer he came to the castle, the more afraid he got.
in the castle kitchen a great fire was blazing, and halvor went into it, but such a kitchen he had never seen in all his born days. it was so grand and fine; there were vessels of silver and vessels of gold, but still never a living soul. so when halvor had stood there a while and no one came out, he went and opened a door, and there inside sat a princess who span upon a spinning-wheel.
"nay, nay, now!" she called out, "dare christian folk come hither? but now you'd best be off about your business, if you don't want the troll to gobble you up; for here lives a troll with three heads."
"all one to me," said the lad, "i'd be just as glad to hear he had four heads beside; i'd like to see what kind of fellow he is. as for going, i won't go at all. i've done no harm; but meat you must get me, for i'm almost starved to death."
when halvor had eaten his fill, the princess told him to try if he could brandish the sword that hung against the wall; no, he couldn't brandish it, he couldn't even lift it up.
"oh!" said the princess, "now you must go and take a pull of that flask that hangs by its side; that's what the troll does every time he goes out to use the sword."
so halvor took a pull, and in the twinkling of an eye he could brandish the sword like nothing; and now he thought it high time the troll came; and lo! just then up came the troll puffing and blowing. halvor jumped behind the door.
"hutetu," said the troll, as he put his head in at the door, "what a smell of christian man's blood!"
"aye," said halvor, "you'll soon know that to your cost," and with that he hewed off all his heads.
now the princess was so glad that she was free, she both danced and sang, but then all at once she called her sisters to mind, and so she said:
"would my sisters were free too!"
"where are they?" asked halvor.
well, she told him all about it; one was taken away by a troll to his castle which lay fifty miles off, and the other by another troll to his castle which was fifty miles further still.
"but now," she said, "you must first help me to get this ugly carcass out of the house."
yes, halvor was so strong he swept everything away, and made it all clean and tidy in no time. so they had a good and happy time of it, and next morning he set off at peep of grey dawn; he could take no rest by the way, but ran and walked the whole day. when he first saw the castle he got a little afraid; it was far grander than the first, but here too there wasn't a living soul to be seen. so halvor went into the kitchen, and didn't stop there either, but went straight further on into the house.
"nay, nay," called out the princess, "dare christian folk come hither? i don't know i'm sure how long it is since i came here, but in all that time i haven't seen a christian man. 'twere best you saw how to get away as fast as you came; for here lives a troll who has six heads."
"i shan't go," said halvor, "if he has six heads besides."
"he'll take you up and swallow you down alive," said the princess.
but it was no good, halvor wouldn't go; he wasn't at all afraid of the troll, but meat and drink he must have, for he was half starved after his long journey. well, he got as much of that as he wished, but then the princess wanted him to be off again.
"no," said halvor, "i won't go, i've done no harm, and i've nothing to be afraid about."
"he won't stay to ask that," said the princess, "for he'll take you without law or leave; but as you won't go, just try if you can brandish that sword yonder, which the troll wields in war."
he couldn't brandish it, and then the princess said he must take a pull at the flask which hung by its side, and when he had done that he could brandish it.
just then back came the troll, and he was both stout and big, so that he had to go sideways to get through the door. when the troll got his first head in he called out:
"hutetu, what a smell of christian man's blood!"
but that very moment halvor hewed off his first head, and so on all the rest as they popped in. the princess was overjoyed, but just then she came to think of her sisters, and wished out loud they were free. halvor thought that might easily be done, and wanted to be off at once; but first he had to help the princess to get the troll's carcass out of the way, and so he could only set out next morning.
it was a long way to the castle, and he had to walk fast and run hard to reach it in time; but about nightfall he saw the castle, which was far finer and grander than either of the others. this time he wasn't the least afraid, but walked straight through the kitchen, and into the castle. there sat a princess who was so pretty, there was no end to her loveliness. she too like the others told him there hadn't been christian folk there ever since she came thither, and bade him go away again, else the troll would swallow him alive, and do you know, she said, he has nine heads.
"aye, aye," said halvor, "if he had nine other heads, and nine other heads still, i won't go away," and so he stood fast before the stove.
the princess kept on begging him so prettily to go away, lest the troll should gobble him up, but halvor said:
"let him come as soon as he likes."
so she gave him the troll's sword, and bade him take a pull at the flask, that he might be able to brandish and wield it.
just then back came the troll puffing and blowing and tearing along.
he was far bigger and stouter than the other two, and he too had to go on one side to get through the door. so when he got his first head in, he said as the others had said:
"hutetu, what a smell of christian man's blood!"
that very moment halvor hewed off the first head and then all the rest; but the last was the toughest of them all, and it was the hardest bit of work halvor had to do, to get it hewn off, although he knew very well he had strength enough to do it.
so all the princesses came together to that castle, which was called soria moria castle, and they were glad and happy as they had never been in all their lives before, and they all were fond of halvor and halvor of them, and he might choose the one he liked best for his bride; but the youngest was fondest of him of all the three.
but there after a while, halvor went about, and was so strange and dull and silent. then the princesses asked him what he lacked, and if he didn't like to live with them any longer? yes, he did, for they had enough and to spare, and he was well off in every way, but still somehow or other he did so long to go home, for his father and mother were alive, and them he had such a great wish to see.
well, they thought that might be done easily enough.
"you shall go thither and come back hither, safe and unscathed, if you will only follow our advice," said the princesses.
yes, he'd be sure to mind all they said. so they dressed him up till he was as grand as a king's son, and then they set a ring on his finger, and that was such a ring, he could wish himself thither and hither with it; but they told him to be sure and not take it off, and not to name their names, for there would be an end of all his bravery, and then he'd never see them more.
"if i only stood at home i'd be glad," said halvor; and it was done as he had wished. then stood halvor at his father's cottage door before he knew a word about it. now it was about dusk at even, and so, when they saw such a grand stately lord walk in, the old couple got so afraid they began to bow and scrape. then halvor asked if he couldn't stay there, and have a lodging there that night. no; that he couldn't.
"we can't do it at all," they said, "for we haven't this thing or that thing which such a lord is used to have; 'twere best your lordship went up to the farm, no long way off, for you can see the chimneys, and there they have lots of everything."
halvor wouldn't hear of it he wanted to stop; but the old couple stuck to their own, that he had better go to the farmer's; there he would get both meat and drink; as for them, they hadn't even a chair to offer him to sit down on.
"no," said halvor, "i won't go up there till to-morrow early, but let me just stay here to-night; worst come to the worst, i can sit in the chimney corner."
well, they couldn't say anything against that; so halvor sat down by the ingle, and began to poke about in the ashes, just as he used to do when he lay at home in old days, and stretched his lazy bones.
well, they chattered and talked about many things; and they told halvor about this thing and that; and so he asked them if they had never had any children.
yes, yes, they had once a lad whose name was halvor, but they didn't know whither he had wandered; they couldn't even tell whether he were dead or alive.
"couldn't it be me, now?" said halvor.
"let me see; i could tell him well enough," said the old wife, and rose up. "our halvor was so lazy and dull, he never did a thing; and besides, he was so ragged, that one tatter took hold of the next tatter on him. no; there never was the making of such a fine fellow in him as you are, master."
a little while after the old wife went to the hearth to poke up the fire, and when the blaze fell on halvor's face, just as when he was at home of old poking about in the ashes, she knew him at once.
"ah! but it is you after all, halvor?" she cried; and then there was such joy for the old couple, there was no end to it; and he was forced to tell how he had fared, and the old dame was so fond and proud of him, nothing would do but he must go up at once to the farmer's, and show himself to the lassies, who had always looked down on him. and off she went first, and halvor followed after. so, when she got up there, she told them all how halvor had come home again, and now they should only just see how grand he was, for, said she, "he looks like nothing but a king's son."
"all very fine," said the lassies, and tossed up their heads. "we'll be bound he's just the same beggarly ragged boy he always was."
just then in walked halvor, and then the lassies were all so taken aback, they forgot their sarks in the ingle, where they were sitting darning their clothes, and ran out in their smocks. well, when they were got back again, they were so shamefaced they scarce dared look at halvor, towards whom they had always been proud and haughty.
"aye, aye," said halvor, "you always thought yourselves so pretty and neat, no one could come near you; but now you should just see the eldest princess i have set free; against her you look just like milkmaids, and the midmost is prettier still; but the youngest, who is my sweetheart, she's fairer than both sun and moon. would to heaven they were only here," said halvor, "then you'd see what you would see."
he had scarce uttered these words before there they stood, but then he felt so sorry, for now what they had said came into his mind. up at the farm there was a great feast got ready for the princesses, and much was made of them, but they wouldn't stop there.
"no, we want to go down to your father and mother," they said to halvor; "and so we'll go out now and look about us."
so he went down with them, and they came to a great lake just outside the farm. close by the water was such a lovely green bank; here the princesses said they would sit and rest a while; they thought it so sweet to sit down and look over the water.
so they sat down there, and when they had sat a while the youngest princess said:
"i may as well comb your hair a little, halvor."
well, halvor laid his head on her lap, and she combed his bonny locks, and it wasn't long before halvor fell fast asleep. then she took the ring from his finger, and put another in its stead; and she said:
"now hold me all together! and now would we were all in soria moria castle."
so when halvor woke up, he could very well tell that he had lost the princesses, and began to weep and wail; and he was so downcast, they couldn't comfort him at all. in spite of all his father and mother said, he wouldn't stop there, but took farewell of them, and said he was safe not to see them again; for if he couldn't find the princesses again, he thought it not worth while to live.
well, he had still about sixty pounds left, so he put them into his pocket, and set out on his way. so, when he had walked a while, he met a man with a tidy horse, and he wanted to buy it, and began to chaffer with the man.
"aye," said the man, "to tell the truth, i never thought of selling him; but if we could strike a bargain perhaps "
"what do you want for him?" asked halvor.
"i didn't give much for him, nor is he worth much; he's a brave horse to ride, but he can't draw at all; still he's strong enough to carry your knapsack and you too, turn and turn about," said the man.
at last they agreed on the price, and halvor laid the knapsack on him, and so he walked a bit, and rode a bit, turn and turn about. at night he came to a green plain where stood a great tree, at the roots of which he sat down. there he let the horse loose, but he didn't lie down to sleep, but opened his knapsack and took a meal. at peep of day off he set again, for he could take no rest. so he rode and walked and walked and rode the whole day through the wide wood, where there were so many green spots and glades that shone so bright and lovely between the trees. he didn't know at all where he was or whither he was going, but he gave himself no more time to rest than when his horse cropped a bit of grass, and he took a snack out of his knapsack when they came to one of those green glades. so he went on walking and riding by turns, and as for the wood there seemed to be no end to it.
but at dusk the next day he saw a light gleaming away through the trees.
"would there were folk hereaway," thought halvor, "that i might warm myself a bit and get a morsel to keep body and soul together."
when he got up to it he saw the light came from a wretched little hut, and through the window he saw an old old, couple inside. they were as grey-headed as a pair of doves, and the old wife had such a nose! why, it was so long she used it for a poker to stir the fire as she sat in the ingle.
"good evening," said halvor.
"good evening," said the old wife.
"but what errand can you have in coming hither?" she went on, "for no christian folk have been here these hundred years and more."
well, halvor told her all about himself, and how he wanted to get to soria moria castle, and asked if she knew the way thither.
"no," said the old wife, "that i don't, but see now, here comes the moon, i'll ask her, she'll know all about it, for doesn't she shine on everything?"
so when the moon stood clear and bright over the tree-tops, the old wife went out.
"thou moon, thou moon," she screamed, "canst thou tell me the way to soria moria castle?"
"no," said the moon, "that i can't, for the last time i shone there a cloud stood before me."
"wait a bit still," said the old wife to halvor, "bye and bye comes the west wind; he's sure to know it, for he puffs and blows round every corner."
"nay, nay," said the old wife when she went out again, "you don't mean to say you've got a horse too; just turn the poor beastie loose in our 'toun,' and don't let him stand there and starve to death at the door."
then she ran on:
"but won't you swop him away to me? we've got an old pair of boots here, with which you can take twenty miles at each stride; those you shall have for your horse, and so you'll get all the sooner to soria moria castle."
that halvor was willing to do at once; and the old wife was so glad at having the horse, she was ready to dance and skip for joy.
"for now," she said, "i shall be able to ride to church. i, too, think of that."
as for halvor, he had no rest, and wanted to be off at once, but the old wife said there was no hurry.
"lie down on the bench with you and sleep a bit, for we've no bed to offer you, and i'll watch and wake you when the west wind comes."
so after a while up came the west wind, roaring and howling along till the walls creaked and groaned again.
out ran the old wife.
"thou west wind, thou west wind! canst thou tell me the way to soria moria castle? here's one who wants to get thither."
"yes, i know it very well," said the west wind, "and now i'm just off thither to dry clothes for the wedding that's to be; if he's swift of foot he can go along with me."
out ran halvor.
"you'll have to stretch your legs if you mean to keep up," said the west wind.
so off he set over field and hedge, and hill and fell, and halvor had hard work to keep up.
"well," said the west wind, "now i've no time to stay with you any longer, for i've got to go away yonder and tear down a strip of spruce wood first before i go to the bleaching-ground to dry the clothes; but if you go alongside the hill you'll come to a lot of lassies standing washing clothes, and then you've not far to go to soria moria castle."
in a little while halvor came upon the lassies who stood washing, and they asked if he had seen anything of the west wind who was to come and dry the clothes for the wedding.
"aye, aye, that i have," said halvor, "he's only gone to tear down a strip of spruce wood. it'll not be long before he's here," and then he asked them the way to soria moria castle.
so they put him into the right way, and when he got to the castle it was full of folk and horses; so full it made one giddy to look at them. but halvor was so ragged and torn from having followed the west wind through bush and brier and bog, that he kept on one side, and wouldn't show himself till the last day when the bridal feast was to be.
so when all, as was then right and fitting, were to drink the bride and bridegroom's health and wish them luck, and when the cupbearer was to drink to them all again, both knights and squires, last of all he came in turn to halvor. he drank their health, but let the ring which the princess had put upon his finger as he lay by the lake fall into the glass, and bade the cupbearer go and greet the bride and hand her the glass.
then up rose the princess from the board at once.
"who is most worthy to have one of us," she said, "he that has set us free, or he that here sits by me as bridegroom?"
well they all said there could be but one voice and will as to that, and when halvor heard that he wasn't long in throwing off his beggar's rags, and arraying himself as bridegroom.
"aye, aye, here is the right one after all," said the youngest princess as soon as she saw him, and so she tossed the other one out of the window, and held her wedding with halvor.
the giant who had no heart in his body
once on a time there was a king who had seven sons, and he loved them so much that he could never bear to be without them all at once, but one must always be with him. now, when they were grown up, six were to set off to woo, but as for the youngest, his father kept him at home, and the others were to bring back a princess for him to the palace. so the king gave the six the finest clothes you ever set eyes on, so fine that the light gleamed from them a long way off, and each had his horse, which cost many, many hundred pounds, and so they set off. now, when they had been to many palaces, and seen many princesses, at last they came to a king who had six daughters; such lovely king's daughters they had never seen, and so they fell to wooing them, each one, and when they had got them for sweethearts, they set off home again, but they quite forgot that they were to bring back with them a sweetheart for boots, their brother, who stayed at home, for they were over head and ears in love with their own sweethearts.
but when they had gone a good bit on their way, they passed close by a steep hill-side, like a wall, where the giant's house was, and there the giant came out, and set his eyes upon them, and turned them all into stone, princes and princesses and all. now the king waited and waited for his six sons, but the more he waited, the longer they stayed away; so he fell into great trouble, and said he should never know what it was to be glad again.
"and if i had not you left," he said to boots, "i would live no longer, so full of sorrow am i for the loss of your brothers."
"well, but now i've been thinking to ask your leave to set out and find them again; that's what i'm thinking of," said boots.
"nay, nay!" said his father; "that leave you shall never get, for then you would stay away too."
but boots had set his heart upon it; go he would; and he begged and prayed so long that the king was forced to let him go. now, you must know the king had no other horse to give boots but an old broken-down jade, for his six other sons and their train had carried off all his horses; but boots did not care a pin for that, he sprang up on his sorry old steed.
"farewell, father," said he; "i'll come back, never fear, and like enough i shall bring my six brothers back with me;" and with that he rode off.
so, when he had ridden a while, he came to a raven, which lay in the road and flapped its wings, and was not able to get out of the way, it was so starved.
"oh, dear friend," said the raven, "give me a little food, and i'll help you again at your utmost need."
"i haven't much food," said the prince, "and i don't see how you'll ever be able to help me much; but still i can spare you a little. i see you want it."
so he gave the raven some of the food he had brought with him.
now, when he had gone a bit further, he came to a brook, and in the brook lay a great salmon, which had got upon a dry place and dashed itself about, and could not get into the water again.
"oh, dear friend," said the salmon to the prince; "shove me out into the water again, and i'll help you again at your utmost need."
"well!" said the prince, "the help you'll give me will not be great, i daresay, but it's a pity you should lie there and choke;" and with that he shot the fish out into the stream again.
after that he went a long, long way, and there met him a wolf which was so famished that it lay and crawled along the road on its belly.
"dear friend, do let me have your horse," said the wolf; "i'm so hungry the wind whistles through my ribs; i've had nothing to eat these two years."
"no," said boots, "this will never do; first i came to a raven, and i was forced to give him my food; next i came to a salmon, and him i had to help into the water again; and now you will have my horse. it can't be done, that it can't, for then i should have nothing to ride on."
"nay, dear friend, but you can help me," said graylegs the wolf; "you can ride upon my back, and i'll help you again in your utmost need."
"well! the help i shall get from you will not be great, i'll be bound," said the prince; "but you may take my horse, since you are in such need."
so when the wolf had eaten the horse, boots took the bit and put it into the wolf's jaw, and laid the saddle on his back; and now the wolf was so strong, after what he had got inside, that he set off with the prince like nothing. so fast he had never ridden before.
"when we have gone a bit farther," said graylegs, "i'll show you the giant's house."
so after a while they came to it.
"see, here is the giant's house," said the wolf; "and see, here are your six brothers, whom the giant has turned into stone; and see, here are their six brides, and away yonder is the door, and in that door you must go."
"nay, but i daren't go in," said the prince; "he'll take my life."
"no! no!" said the wolf; "when you get in you'll find a princess, and she'll tell you what to do to make an end of the giant. only mind and do as she bids you."
well! boots went in, but, truth to say, he was very much afraid.
when he came in the giant was away, but in one of the rooms sat the princess, just as the wolf had said, and so lovely a princess boots had never yet set eyes on.
"oh! heaven help you! whence have you come?" said the princess, as she saw him; "it will surely be your death. no one can make an end of the giant who lives here, for he has no heart in his body."
"well! well!" said boots; "but now that i am here, i may as well try what i can do with him; and i will see if i can't free my brothers, who are standing turned to stone out of doors; and you, too, i will try to save, that i will."
"well, if you must, you must," said the princess; "and so let us see if we can't hit on a plan. just creep under the bed yonder, and mind and listen to what he and i talk about. but, pray, do lie as still as a mouse."
so he crept under the bed, and he had scarce got well underneath it, before the giant came.
"ha!" roared the giant, "what a smell of christian blood there is in the house!"
"yes, i know there is," said the princess, "for there came a magpie flying with a man's bone, and let it fall down the chimney. i made all the haste i could to get it out, but all one can do, the smell doesn't go off so soon."
so the giant said no more about it, and when night came, they went to bed. after they had lain a while, the princess said:
"there is one thing i'd be so glad to ask you about, if i only dared."
"what thing is that?" asked the giant.
"only where it is you keep your heart, since you don't carry it about you," said the princess.
"ah! that's a thing you've no business to ask about; but if you must know, it lies under the door-sill," said the giant.
"ho! ho!" said boots to himself under the bed, "then we'll soon see if we can't find it."
next morning the giant got up cruelly early, and strode off to the wood; but he was hardly out of the house before boots and the princess set to work to look under the door-sill for his heart; but the more they dug, and the more they hunted, the more they couldn't find it.
"he has baulked us this time," said the princess, "but we'll try him once more."
so she picked all the prettiest flowers she could find, and strewed them over the door-sill, which they had laid in its right place again; and when the time came for the giant to come home again, boots crept under the bed. just as he was well under, back came the giant.
snuff snuff, went the giant's nose. "my eyes and limbs, what a smell of christian blood there is in here," said he.
"i know there is," said the princess, "for there came a magpie flying with a man's bone in his bill, and let it fall down the chimney. i made as much haste as i could to get it out, but i daresay it's that you smell."
so the giant held his peace, and said no more about it. a little while after, he asked who it was that had strewed flowers about the door-sill.
"oh, i, of course," said the princess.
"and, pray, what's the meaning of all this?" said the giant.
"ah!" said the princess, "i'm so fond of you that i couldn't help strewing them, when i knew that your heart lay under there."
"you don't say so," said the giant; "but after all it doesn't lie there at all."
so when they went to bed again in the evening, the princess asked the giant again where his heart was, for she said she would so like to know.
"well," said the giant, "if you must know, it lies away yonder in the cupboard against the wall."
"so, so!" thought boots and the princess; "then we'll soon try to find it."
next morning the giant was away early, and strode off to the wood, and so soon as he was gone boots and the princess were in the cupboard hunting for his heart, but the more they sought for it, the less they found it.
"well," said the princess, "we'll just try him once more."
so she decked out the cupboard with flowers and garlands, and when the time came for the giant to come home, boots crept under the bed again.
then back came the giant.
snuff snuff! "my eyes and limbs, what a smell of christian blood there is in here!"
"i know there is," said the princess; "for a little while since there came a magpie flying with a man's bone in his bill, and let it fall down the chimney. i made all the haste i could to get it out of the house again; but after all my pains, i daresay it's that you smell."
when the giant heard that, he said no more about it; but a little while after, he saw how the cupboard was all decked about with flowers and garlands; so he asked who it was that had done that? who could it be but the princess?
"and, pray, what's the meaning of all this tomfoolery?" asked the giant.
"oh, i'm so fond of you, i couldn't help doing it when i knew that your heart lay there," said the princess.
"how can you be so silly as to believe any such thing?" said the giant.
"oh yes; how can i help believing it, when you say it?" said the princess.
"you're a goose," said the giant; "where my heart is, you will never come."
"well," said the princess; "but for all that, 'twould be such a pleasure to know where it really lies."
then the poor giant could hold out no longer, but was forced to say:
"far, far away in a lake lies an island; on that island stands a church; in that church is a well; in that well swims a duck; in that duck there is an egg, and in that egg there lies my heart, you darling!"
in the morning early, while it was still grey dawn, the giant strode off to the wood.
"yes! now i must set off too," said boots; "if i only knew how to find the way." he took a long, long farewell of the princess, and when he got out of the giant's door, there stood the wolf waiting for him. so boots told him all that had happened inside the house, and said now he wished to ride to the well in the church, if he only knew the way. so the wolf bade him jump on his back, he'd soon find the way; and away they went, till the wind whistled after them, over hedge and field, over hill and dale. after they had travelled many, many days, they came at last to the lake. then the prince did not know how to get over it, but the wolf bade him only not be afraid, but stick on, and so he jumped into the lake with the prince on his back, and swam over to the island. so they came to the church; but the church keys hung high, high up on the top of the tower, and at first the prince did not know how to get them down.
"you must call on the raven," said the wolf.
so the prince called on the raven, and in a trice the raven came, and flew up and fetched the keys, and so the prince got into the church. but when he came to the well, there lay the duck, and swam about backwards and forwards, just as the giant had said. so the prince stood and coaxed it, till it came to him, and he grasped it in his hand; but just as he lifted it up from the water the duck dropped the egg into the well, and then boots was beside himself to know how to get it out again.
"well, now you must call on the salmon to be sure," said the wolf; and the king's son called on the salmon, and the salmon came and fetched up the egg from the bottom of the well.
then the wolf told him to squeeze the egg, and as soon as ever he squeezed it the giant screamed out.
"squeeze it again," said the wolf; and when the prince did so, the giant screamed still more piteously, and begged and prayed so prettily to be spared, saying he would do all that the prince wished if he would only not squeeze his heart in two.
"tell him, if he will restore to life again your six brothers and their brides, whom he has turned to stone, you will spare his life,"
said the wolf. yes, the giant was ready to do that, and he turned the six brothers into king's sons again, and their brides into king's daughters.
"now, squeeze the egg in two," said the wolf. so boots squeezed the egg to pieces, and the giant burst at once.
now, when he had made an end of the giant, boots rode back again on the wolf to the giant's house, and there stood all his six brothers alive and merry, with their brides. then boots went into the hill-side after his bride, and so they all set off home again to their father's house. and you may fancy how glad the old king was when he saw all his seven sons come back, each with his bride "but the loveliest bride of all is the bride of boots, after all," said the king, "and he shall sit uppermost at the table, with her by his side."
so he sent out, and called a great wedding-feast, and the mirth was both loud and long, and if they have not done feasting, why, they are still at it.
the princess on the glass hill
once on a time there was a man who had a meadow, which lay high up on the hill-side, and in the meadow was a barn, which he had built to keep his hay in. now, i must tell you, there hadn't been much in the barn for the last year or two, for every st. john's night, when the grass stood greenest and deepest, the meadow was eaten down to the very ground the next morning, just as if a whole drove of sheep had been there feeding on it over night. this happened once, and it happened twice; so at last the man grew weary of losing his crop of hay, and said to his sons for he had three of them, and the youngest was nicknamed boots, of course that now one of them must go and sleep in the barn in the outlying field when st. john's night came, for it was too good a joke that his grass should be eaten, root and blade, this year, as it had been the last two years. so whichever of them went must keep a sharp look-out; that was what their father said.
well, the eldest son was ready to go and watch the meadow; trust him for looking after the grass! it shouldn't be his fault if man or beast, or the fiend himself, got a blade of grass. so, when evening came, he set off to the barn, and lay down to sleep; but a little on in the night came such a clatter, and such an earthquake, that walls and roof shook, and groaned, and creaked; then up jumped the lad, and took to his heels as fast as ever he could; nor dared he once look round till he reached home; and as for the hay, why it was eaten up this year just as it had been twice before.
the next st. john's night, the man said again, it would never do to lose all the grass in the outlying field year after year in this way, so one of his sons must just trudge off to watch it, and watch it well too. well, the next oldest son was ready to try his luck, so he set off, and lay down to sleep in the barn as his brother had done before him; but as the night wore on, there came on a rumbling and quaking of the earth, worse even than on the last st. john's night, and when the lad heard it, he got frightened, and took to his heels as though he were running a race.
next year the turn came to boots; but when he made ready to go, the other two began to laugh and to make game of him, saying:
"you're just the man to watch the hay, that you are; you, who have done nothing all your life but sit in the ashes and toast yourself by the fire."
but boots did not care a pin for their chattering, and stumped away as evening grew on, up the hill-side to the outlying field. there he went inside the barn and lay down; but in about an hour's time the barn began to groan and creak, so that it was dreadful to hear.
"well," said boots to himself, "if it isn't worse than this, i can stand it well enough."
a little while after came another creak and an earthquake, so that the litter in the barn flew about the lad's ears. "oh!" said boots to himself, "if it isn't worse than this, i daresay i can stand it out."
but just then came a third rumbling, and a third earthquake, so that the lad thought walls and roof were coming down on his head; but it passed off, and all was still as death about him.
"it'll come again, i'll be bound," thought boots; but no, it didn't come again; still it was, and still it stayed; but after he had lain a little while, he heard a noise as if a horse were standing just outside the barn-door, and cropping the grass. he stole to the door, and peeped through a chink, and there stood a horse feeding away. so big, and fat, and grand a horse, boots had never set eyes on; by his side on the grass lay a saddle and bridle, and a full set of armour for a knight, all of brass, so bright that the light gleamed from it.
"ho, ho!" thought the lad; "it's you, is it, that eats up our hay?
i'll soon put a spoke in your wheel, just see if i don't."
so he lost no time, but took the steel out of his tinder-box, and threw it over the horse; then it had no power to stir from the spot, and became so tame that the lad could do what he liked with it. so he got on its back, and rode off with it to a place which no one knew of, and there he put up the horse. when he got home, his brothers laughed and asked how he had fared?
"you didn't lie long in the barn, even if you had the heart to go so far as the field."
"well," said boots, "all i can say is, i lay in the barn till the sun rose, and neither saw nor heard anything; i can't think what there was in the barn to make you both so afraid."
"a pretty story," said his brothers; "but we'll soon see how you have watched the meadow;" so they set off; but when they reached it, there stood the grass as deep and thick as it had been over night.
well, the next st. john's eve it was the same story over again; neither of the elder brothers dared to go out to the outlying field to watch the crop; but boots, he had the heart to go, and everything happened just as it had happened the year before. first a clatter and an earthquake, then a greater clatter and another earthquake, and so on a third time; only this year the earthquakes were far worse than the year before. then all at once everything was as still as death, and the lad heard how something was cropping the grass outside the barn-door, so he stole to the door, and peeped through a chink; and what do you think he saw? why, another horse standing right up against the wall, and chewing and champing with might and main. it was far finer and fatter than that which came the year before, and it had a saddle on its back, and a bridle on its neck, and a full suit of mail for a knight lay by its side, all of silver, and as grand as you would wish to see.
"ho, ho!" said boots to himself; "it's you that gobbles up our hay, is it? i'll soon put a spoke in your wheel;" and with that he took the steel out of his tinder-box, and threw it over the horse's crest, which stood as still as a lamb. well, the lad rode this horse, too, to the hiding-place where he kept the other one, and after that he went home.
"i suppose you'll tell us," said one of his brothers, "there's a fine crop this year too, up in the hayfield."
"well, so there is," said boots; and off ran the others to see, and there stood the grass thick and deep, as it was the year before; but they didn't give boots softer words for all that.
now, when the third st. john's eve came, the two elder brothers still hadn't the heart to lie out in the barn and watch the grass, for they had got so scared at heart the nights they lay there before, that they couldn't get over the fright; but boots, he dared to go; and, to make a very long story short, the very same thing happened this time as had happened twice before. three earthquakes came, one after the other, each worse than the one which went before, and when the last came, the lad danced about with the shock from one barn wall to the other; and after that, all at once, it was still as death. now when he had laid a little while, he heard something tugging away at the grass outside the barn, so he stole again to the door-chink, and peeped out, and there stood a horse close outside far, far bigger and fatter than the two he had taken before.
"ho, ho!" said the lad to himself, "it's you, is it, that comes here eating up our hay? i'll soon stop that i'll soon put a spoke in your wheel." so he caught up his steel and threw it over his horse's neck, and in a trice it stood as if it were nailed to the ground, and boots could do as he pleased with it. then he rode off with it to the hiding-place where he kept the other two, and then went home. when he got home, his two brothers made game of him as they had done before, saying, they could see he had watched the grass well, for he looked for all the world as if he were walking in his sleep, and many other spiteful things they said, but boots gave no heed to them, only asking them to go and see for themselves; and when they went, there stood the grass as fine and deep this time as it had been twice before.
now, you must know that the king of the country where boots lived had a daughter, whom he would only give to the man who could ride up over the hill of glass, for there was a high, high hill, all of glass, as smooth and slippery as ice, close by the king's palace. upon the tip top of the hill the king's daughter was to sit, with three golden apples in her lap, and the man who could ride up and carry off the three golden apples, was to have half the kingdom, and the princess to wife. this the king had stuck up on all the church-doors in his realm, and had given it out in many other kingdoms besides. now, this princess was so lovely that all who set eyes on her fell over head and ears in love with her whether they would or no. so i needn't tell you how all the princes and knights who heard of her were eager to win her to wife, and half the kingdom beside; and how they came riding from all parts of the world on high prancing horses, and clad in the grandest clothes, for there wasn't one of them who hadn't made up his mind that he, and he alone, was to win the princess.
so when the day of trial came, which the king had fixed, there was such a crowd of princes and knights under the glass hill, that it made one's head whirl to look at them, and everyone in the country who could even crawl along was off to the hill, for they were all eager to see the man who was to win the princess. so the two elder brothers set off with the rest; but as for boots, they said outright he shouldn't go with them, for if they were seen with such a dirty changeling, all begrimed with smut from cleaning their shoes and sifting cinders in the dust-hole, they said folk would make game of them.
"very well," said boots, "it's all one to me. i can go alone, and stand or fall by myself."
now when the two brothers came to the hill of glass, the knights and princes were all hard at it, riding their horses till they were all in a foam; but it was no good, by my troth; for as soon as ever the horses set foot on the hill, down they slipped, and there wasn't one who could get a yard or two up; and no wonder, for the hill was as smooth as a sheet of glass, and as steep as a house-wall. but all were eager to have the princess and half the kingdom. so they rode and slipped, and slipped and rode, and still it was the same story over again. at last all their horses were so weary that they could scarce lift a leg, and in such a sweat that the lather dripped from them, and so the knights had to give up trying any more. so the king was just thinking that he would proclaim a new trial for the next day, to see if they would have better luck, when all at once a knight came riding up on so brave a steed, that no one had ever seen the like of it in his born days, and the knight had mail of brass, and the horse a brass bit in his mouth, so bright that the sunbeams shone from it. then all the others called out to him he might just as well spare himself the trouble of riding at the hill, for it would lead to no good; but he gave no heed to them, and put his horse at the hill, and went up it like nothing for a good way, about a third of the height; and when he had got so far, he turned his horse round and rode down again. so lovely a knight the princess thought she had never yet seen; and while he was riding, she sat and thought to herself:
"would to heaven he might only come up and down the other side."
and when she saw him turning back, she threw down one of the golden apples after him, and it rolled down into his shoe. but when he got to the bottom of the hill, he rode off so fast that no one could tell what had become of him. that evening all the knights and princes were to go before the king, that he who had ridden so far up the hill might show the apple which the princess had thrown, but there was no one who had anything to show. one after the other they all came, but not a man of them could show the apple.
at even the brothers of boots came home too, and had such a long story to tell about the riding up the hill.
"first of all," they said, "there was not one of the whole lot who could get so much as a stride up; but at last came one who had a suit of brass mail, and a brass bridle and saddle, all so bright that the sun shone from them a mile off. he was a chap to ride, just! he rode a third of the way up the hill of glass, and he could easily have ridden the whole way up, if he chose; but he turned round and rode down, thinking, maybe, that was enough for once."
"oh! i should so like to have seen him, that i should," said boots, who sat by the fireside, and stuck his feet into the cinders, as was his wont.
"oh!" said his brothers, "you would, would you? you look fit to keep company with such high lords, nasty beast that you are, sitting there amongst the ashes."
next day the brothers were all for setting off again, and boots begged them this time, too, to let him go with them and see the riding; but no, they wouldn't have him at any price, he was too ugly and nasty, they said.
"well, well!" said boots; "if i go at all, i must go by myself. i'm not afraid."
so when the brothers got to the hill of glass, all the princes and knights began to ride again, and you may fancy they had taken care to shoe their horses sharp; but it was no good they rode and slipped, and slipped and rode, just as they had done the day before, and there was not one who could get so far as a yard up the hill. and when they had worn out their horses, so that they could not stir a leg, they were all forced to give it up as a bad job. so the king thought he might as well proclaim that the riding should take place the day after for the last time, just to give them one chance more; but all at once it came across his mind that he might as well wait a little longer, to see if the knight in brass mail would come this day too. well, they saw nothing of him; but all at once came one riding on a steed, far, far braver and finer than that on which the knight in brass had ridden, and he had silver mail, and a silver saddle and bridle, all so bright that the sunbeams gleamed and glanced from them far away. then the others shouted out to him again, saying, he might as well hold hard, and not try to ride up the hill, for all his trouble would be thrown away; but the knight paid no heed to them, and rode straight at the hill, and right up it, till he had gone two-thirds of the way, and then he wheeled his horse round and rode down again. to tell the truth, the princess liked him still better than the knight in brass, and she sat and wished he might only be able to come right up to the top, and down the other side; but when she saw him turning back, she threw the second apple after him, and it rolled down and fell into his shoe. but, as soon as ever he had come down from the hill of glass, he rode off so fast that no one could see what became of him.
at even, when all were to go in before the king and the princess, that he who had the golden apple might show it, in they went, one after the other, but there was no one who had any apple to show, and the two brothers, as they had done on the former day, went home and told how things had gone, and how all had ridden at the hill, and none got up.
"but, last of all," they said, "came one in a silver suit, and his horse had a silver saddle and a silver bridle. he was just a chap to ride; and he got two-thirds up the hill, and then turned back. he was a fine fellow, and no mistake; and the princess threw the second gold apple to him."
"oh!" said boots, "i should so like to have seen him too, that i should."
"a pretty story," they said. "perhaps you think his coat of mail was as bright as the ashes you are always poking about, and sifting, you nasty dirty beast."
the third day everything happened as it had happened the two days before. boots begged to go and see the sight, but the two wouldn't hear of his going with them. when they got to the hill there was no one who could get so much as a yard up it; and now all waited for the knight in silver mail, but they neither saw nor heard of him. at last came one riding on a steed, so brave that no one had ever seen his match; and the knight had a suit of golden mail, and a golden saddle and bridle, so wondrous bright that the sunbeams gleamed from them a mile off. the other knights and princes could not find time to call out to him not to try his luck, for they were amazed to see how grand he was. so he rode right at the hill, and tore up it like nothing, so that the princess hadn't even time to wish that he might get up the whole way. as soon as ever he reached the top, he took the third golden apple from the princess' lap, and then turned his horse and rode down again. as soon as he got down, he rode off at full speed, and was out of sight in no time.
now, when the brothers got home at even, you may fancy what long stories they told, how the riding had gone off that day; and amongst other things, they had a deal to say about the knight in golden mail.
"he just was a chap to ride!" they said; "so grand a knight isn't to be found in the wide world."
"oh!" said boots, "i should so like to have seen him, that i should."
"ah!" said his brothers, "his mail shone a deal brighter than the glowing coals which you are always poking and digging at; nasty dirty beast that you are."
next day all the knights and princes were to pass before the king and the princess it was too late to do so the night before, i suppose that he who had the gold apple might bring it forth; but one came after another, first the princes, and then the knights, and still no one could show the gold apple.
"well," said the king, "some one must have it, for it was something we all saw with our own eyes, how a man came and rode up and bore it off."
so he commanded that every man who was in the kingdom should come up to the palace and see if they could show the apple. well, they all came one after another, but no one had the golden apple, and after a long time the two brothers of boots came. they were the last of all, so the king asked them if there was no one else in the kingdom who hadn't come.
"oh, yes," said they; "we have a brother, but he never carried off the golden apple. he hasn't stirred out of the dusthole on any of the three days."
"never mind that," said the king; "he may as well come up to the palace like the rest."
so boots had to go up to the palace.
"how now," said the king; "have you got the golden apple? speak out!"
"yes, i have," said boots; "here is the first, and here is the second, and here is the third too;" and with that he pulled all three golden apples out of his pocket, and at the same time threw off his sooty rags, and stood before them in his gleaming golden mail.
"yes!" said the king; "you shall have my daughter, and half my kingdom, for you well deserve both her and it."
so they got ready for the wedding, and boots got the princess to wife, and there was great merry-making at the bridal-feast, you may fancy, for they could all be merry though they couldn't ride up the hill of glass; and all i can say is, if they haven't left off their merry-making yet, why, they're still at it.
the widow's son
once on a time there was a poor, poor widow, who had an only son.
she dragged on with the boy till he had been confirmed, and then she said she couldn't feed him any longer, he must just go out and earn his own bread. so the lad wandered out into the world, and when he had walked a day or so, a strange man met him.
"whither away?" asked the man.
"whither away?" asked the man.]
"oh, i'm going out into the world to try and get a place," said the lad.
"will you come and serve me?" said the man.
"oh, yes; just as soon you as any one else," said the lad.
"well, you'll have a good place with me," said the man; "for you'll only have to keep me company, and do nothing at all else beside."
so the lad stopped with him, and lived on the fat of the land, both in meat and drink, and had little or nothing to do; but he never saw a living soul in that man's house.
so one day the man said:
"now, i'm going off for eight days, and that time you'll have to spend here all alone; but you must not go into any one of these four rooms here. if you do, i'll take your life when i come back."
"no," said the lad, he'd be sure not to do that. but when the man had been gone three or four days, the lad couldn't bear it any longer, but went into the first room, and when he got inside he looked round, but he saw nothing but a shelf over the door where a bramble-bush rod lay.
well, indeed! thought the lad; a pretty thing to forbid my seeing this.
so when the eight days were out, the man came home, and the first thing he said was:
"you haven't been into any of these rooms, of course."
"no, no; that i haven't," said the lad.
"i'll soon see that," said the man, and went at once into the room where the lad had been.
"nay, but you have been in here," said he; "and now you shall lose your life."
then the lad begged and prayed so hard that he got off with his life, but the man gave him a good thrashing. and when it was over, they were as good friends as ever.
some time after the man set off again, and said he should be away fourteen days; but before he went he forbade the lad to go into any of the rooms he had not been in before; as for that he had been in, he might go into that, and welcome. well, it was the same story over again, except that the lad stood out eight days before he went in. in this room, too, he saw nothing but a shelf over the door, and a big stone, and a pitcher of water on it. well, after all, there's not much to be afraid of my seeing here, thought the lad.
but when the man came back, he asked if he had been into any of the rooms. no, the lad hadn't done anything of the kind.
"well, well; i'll soon see that," said the man; and when he saw the lad had been in them after all, he said:
"ah! now i'll spare you no longer; now you must lose your life."
but the lad begged and prayed for himself again, and so this time too he got off with stripes; though he got as many as his skin would carry. but when he got sound and well again, he led just as easy a life as ever, and he and the man were just as good friends.
so a while after the man was to take another journey, and now he said he should be away three weeks, and he forbade the lad anew to go into the third room, for if he went in there he might just make up his mind at once to lose his life. then after fourteen days the lad couldn't bear it, but crept into the room, but he saw nothing at all in there but a trap door on the floor; and when he lifted it up and looked down, there stood a great copper cauldron which bubbled up and boiled away down there; but he saw no fire under it.
"well, i should just like to know if it's hot," thought the lad, and struck his finger down into the broth, and when he pulled it out again, lo! it was gilded all over. so the lad scraped and scrubbed it, but the gilding wouldn't go off, so he bound a piece of rag round it; and when the man came back, and asked what was the matter with his finger, the lad said he'd given it such a bad cut. but the man tore off the rag, and then he soon saw what was the matter with the finger.
first he wanted to kill the lad outright, but when he wept, and begged, he only gave him such a thrashing that he had to keep his bed three days. after that the man took down a pot from the wall, and rubbed him over with some stuff out of it, and so the lad was as sound and fresh as ever.
so after a while the man started off again, and this time he was to be away a month. but before he went, he said to the lad, if he went into the fourth room he might give up all hope of saving his life.
well, the lad stood out for two or three weeks, but then he couldn't hold out any longer; he must and would go into that room, and so in he stole. there stood a great black horse tied up in a stall by himself, with a manger of red-hot coals at his head and a truss of hay at his tail. then the lad thought this all wrong, so he changed them about, and put the hay at his head. then said the horse:
"since you are so good at heart as to let me have some food, i'll set you free, that i will. for if the troll comes back and finds you here, he'll kill you outright. but now you must go up to the room which lies just over this, and take a coat of mail out of those that hang there; and mind, whatever you do, don't take any of the bright ones, but the most rusty of all you see, that's the one to take; and sword and saddle you must choose for yourself just in the same way."
so the lad did all that; but it was a heavy load for him to carry them all down at once.
when he came back, the horse told him to pull off his clothes and get into the cauldron which stood and boiled in the other room, and bathe himself there. "if i do," thought the lad, "i shall look an awful fright;" but for all that, he did as he was told. so when he had taken his bath, he became so handsome and sleek, and as red and white as milk and blood, and much stronger than he had been before.
"do you feel any change?" asked the horse.
"yes," said the lad.
"try and lift me, then," said the horse.
oh yes! he could do that, and as for the sword, he brandished it like a feather.
"now saddle me," said the horse, "and put on the coat of mail, and then take the bramble-bush rod, and the stone, and the pitcher of water, and the pot of ointment, and then we'll be off as fast as we can."
so when the lad had got on the horse, off they went at such a rate, he couldn't at all tell how they went. but when he had ridden awhile, the horse said, "i think i hear a noise; look round! can you see anything?"
"yes; there are ever so many coming after us, at least a score," said the lad.
"aye, aye, that's the troll coming," said the horse; "now he's after us with his pack."
so they rode on a while, until those who followed were close behind them.
"now throw your bramble-bush rod behind you, over your shoulder," said the horse; "but mind you throw it a good way off my back."
so the lad did that, and all at once a close, thick bramblewood grew up behind them. so the lad rode on a long, long time, while the troll and his crew had to go home to fetch something to hew their way through the wood. but at last the horse said again:
"look behind you! can you see anything now?"
"yes, ever so many," said the lad, "as many as would fill a large church."
"aye, aye, that's the troll and his crew," said the horse; "now he's got more to back him; but now throw down the stone, and mind you throw it far behind me."
and as soon as the lad did what the horse said, up rose a great black hill of rock behind him. so the troll had to be off home to fetch something to mine his way through the rock; and while the troll did that, the lad rode a good bit further on. but still the horse begged him to look behind him, and then he saw a troop like a whole army behind him, and they glistened in the sunbeams.
"aye, aye," said the horse, "that's the troll, and now he's got his whole band with him, so throw the pitcher of water behind you, but mind you don't spill any of it upon me."
so the lad did that; but in spite of all the pains he took, he still spilt one drop on the horse's flank. so it became a great deep lake; and because of that one drop, the horse found himself far out in it, but still he swam safe to land. but when the trolls came to the lake, they lay down to drink it dry; and so they swilled and swilled till they burst.
"now we're rid of them," said the horse.
so when they had gone a long, long while, they came to a green patch in a wood.
"now, strip off all your arms," said the horse, "and only put on your ragged clothes, and take the saddle off me, and let me loose, and hang all my clothing and your arms up inside that great hollow lime-tree yonder. then make yourself a wig of fir-moss, and go up to the king's palace, which lies close here, and ask for a place.
whenever you need me, only come here and shake the bridle, and i'll come to you."
yes! the lad did all his horse told him, and as soon as ever he put on the wig of moss he became so ugly, and pale, and miserable to look at, no one would have known him again. then he went up to the king's palace and begged first for leave to be in the kitchen, and bring in wood and water for the cook, but then the kitchen-maid asked him:
"why do you wear that ugly wig? off with it. i won't have such a fright in here."
"no, i can't do that," said the lad; "for i'm not quite right in my head."
"do you think then i'll have you in here about the food," cried the cook. "away with you to the coachman; you're best fit to go and clean the stable."
but when the coachman begged him to take his wig off, he got the same answer, and he wouldn't have him either.
"you'd best go down to the gardener," said he; "you're best fit to go about and dig in the garden."
so he got leave to be with the gardener, but none of the other servants would sleep with him, and so he had to sleep by himself under the steps of the summer-house. it stood upon beams, and had a high staircase. under that he got some turf for his bed, and there he lay as well as he could.
so, when he had been some time at the palace, it happened one morning, just as the sun rose, that the lad had taken off his wig, and stood and washed himself, and then he was so handsome, it was a joy to look at him.
so the princess saw from her window the lovely gardener's boy, and thought she had never seen any one so handsome. then she asked the gardener why he lay out there under the steps.
"oh," said the gardener, "none of his fellow-servants will sleep with him; that's why."
"let him come up to-night, and lie at the door inside my bedroom, and then they'll not refuse to sleep with him any more," said the princess.
so the gardener told that to the lad.
"do you think i'll do any such thing?" said the lad. "why they'd say next there was something between me and the princess."
"yes," said the gardener, "you've good reason to fear any such thing, you who are so handsome."
"well, well," said the lad, "since it's her will, i suppose i must go."
so, when he was to go up the steps in the evening, he tramped and stamped so on the way, that they had to beg him to tread softly lest the king should come to know it. so he came into the princess' bedroom, lay down, and began to snore at once. then the princess said to her maid:
"go gently, and just pull his wig off;" and she went up to him.
but just as she was going to whisk it off, he caught hold of it with both hands, and said she should never have it. after that he lay down again, and began to snore. then the princess gave her maid a wink, and this time she whisked off the wig; and there lay the lad so lovely, and white and red, just as the princess had seen him in the morning sun.
after that the lad slept every night in the princess' bedroom.
but it wasn't long before the king came to hear how the gardener's lad slept every night in the princess' bedroom; and he got so wroth he almost took the lad's life. he didn't do that, however, but he threw him into the prison tower; and as for his daughter, he shut her up in her own room, whence she never got leave to stir day or night.
all that she begged, and all that she prayed, for the lad and herself, was no good. the king was only more wroth than ever.
some time after came a war and uproar in the land, and the king had to take up arms against another king who wished to take the kingdom from him. so when the lad heard that, he begged the gaoler to go to the king and ask for a coat of mail and a sword, and for leave to go to the war. all the rest laughed when the gaoler told his errand, and begged the king to let him have an old worn-out suit, that they might have the fun of seeing such a wretch in battle. so he got that, and an old broken-down hack besides, which went upon three legs, and dragged the fourth after it.
then they went out to meet the foe; but they hadn't got far from the palace before the lad got stuck fast in a bog with his hack. there he sat and dug his spurs in, and cried, "gee up! gee up!" to his hack.
and all the rest had their fun out of this, and laughed, and made game of the lad as they rode past him. but they were scarcely gone, before he ran to the lime-tree, threw on his coat of mail, and shook the bridle, and there came the horse in a trice, and said: "do now your best, and i'll do mine."
but when the lad came up the battle had begun, and the king was in a sad pinch; but no sooner had the lad rushed into the thick of it than the foe was beaten back, and put to flight. the king and his men wondered and wondered who it could be who had come to help them, but none of them got so near him as to be able to talk to him, and as soon as the fight was over he was gone. when they went back, there sat the lad still in the bog, and dug his spurs into his three-legged hack, and they all laughed again.
"no! only just look," they said; "there the fool sits still."
the next day when they went out to battle, they saw the lad sitting there still, so they laughed again, and made game of him; but as soon as ever they had ridden by, the lad ran again to the lime-tree, and all happened as on the first day. every one wondered what strange champion it could be that had helped them, but no one got so near him as to say a word to him; and no one guessed it could be the lad; that's easy to understand.
so when they went home at night, and saw the lad still sitting there on his hack, they burst out laughing at him again, and one of them shot an arrow at him and hit him in the leg. so he began to shriek and to bewail; 'twas enough to break one's heart; and so the king threw his pocket-handkerchief to him to bind his wound.
when they went out to battle the third day, the lad still sat there.
"gee up! gee up!" he said to his hack.
"nay, nay," said the king's men; "if he won't stick there till he's starved to death."
and then they rode on, and laughed at him till they were fit to fall from their horses. when they were gone, he ran again to the lime, and came up to the battle just in the very nick of time. this day he slew the enemy's king, and then the war was over at once.
when the battle was over, the king caught sight of his handkerchief, which the strange warrior had bound round his leg, and so it wasn't hard to find him out. so they took him with great joy between them to the palace, and the princess, who saw him from her window, got so glad, no one can believe it.
"here comes my own true love," she said.
then he took the pot of ointment and rubbed himself on the leg, and after that he rubbed all the wounded, and so they all got well again in a moment.
so he got the princess to wife; but when he went down into the stable where his horse was on the day the wedding was to be, there it stood so dull and heavy, and hung its ears down, and wouldn't eat its corn. so when the young king for he was now a king, and had got half the kingdom spoke to him, and asked what ailed him, the horse said:
"now i have helped you on, and now i won't live any longer. so just take the sword, and cut my head off."
"no, i'll do nothing of the kind," said the young king; "but you shall have all you want, and rest all your life."
"well," said the horse, "if you don't do as i tell you, see if i don't take your life somehow."
so the king had to do what he asked; but when he swung the sword and was to cut his head off, he was so sorry he turned away his face, for he would not see the stroke fall. but as soon as ever he had cut off the head, there stood the loveliest prince on the spot where the horse had stood.
"why, where in all the world did you come from?" asked the king.
"it was i who was a horse," said the prince; "for i was king of that land whose king you slew yesterday. he it was who threw this troll's shape over me, and sold me to the troll. but now he is slain i get my own again, and you and i will be neighbour kings, but war we will never make on one another."
and they didn't either; for they were friends as long as they lived, and each paid the other very many visits.
the three billy-goats gruff
once on a time there were three billy-goats, who were to go up to the hill-side to make themselves fat, and the name of all three was "gruff."
on the way up was a bridge over a burn they had to cross; and under the bridge lived a great ugly troll, with eyes as big as saucers, and a nose as long as a poker.
so first of all came the youngest billy-goat gruff to cross the bridge.
"trip, trap! trip, trap!" went the bridge.
"who's that tripping over my bridge?" roared the troll.
"oh! it is only i, the tiniest billy-goat gruff; and i'm going up to the hill-side to make myself fat," said the billy-goat, with such a small voice.
"now, i'm coming to gobble you up," said the troll.
"oh, no! pray don't take me. i'm too little, that i am," said the billy-goat; "wait a bit till the second billy-goat gruff comes, he's much bigger."
"well! be off with you," said the troll.
a little while after came the second billy-goat gruff to cross the bridge.
"trip, trap! trip, trap! trip, trap!" went the bridge.
"who's that tripping over my bridge?" roared the troll.
"oh! it's the second billy-goat gruff, and i'm going up to the hill-side to make myself fat," said the billy-goat, who hadn't such a small voice.
"now, i'm coming to gobble you up," said the troll.
"oh, no! don't take me, wait a little till the big billy-goat gruff comes, he's much bigger."
"very well! be off with you," said the troll.
but just then up came the big billy-goat gruff.
"trip, trap! trip, trap! trip, trap!" went the bridge, for the billy-goat was so heavy that the bridge creaked and groaned under him.
"who's that tramping over my bridge?" roared the troll.
"it's i! the big billy-goat gruff," said the billy-goat, who had an ugly hoarse voice of his own.
"now, i'm coming to gobble you up," roared the troll.
"well, come along! i've got two spears, and i'll poke your eyeballs out at your ears; i've got besides two curling-stones, and i'll crush you to bits, body and bones."
that was what the big billy-goat said; and so he flew at the troll and poked his eyes out with his horns, and crushed him to bits, body and bones, and tossed him out into the burn, and after that he went up to the hill-side. there the billy-goats got so fat they were scarce able to walk home again; and if the fat hasn't fallen off them, why they're still fat; and so:
snip, snap, snout, this tale's told out.
the three princesses in the blue mountain
there were once upon a time a king and queen who had no children, and they took it so much to heart that they hardly ever had a happy moment. one day the king stood in the portico and looked out over the big meadows and all that was his. but he felt he could have no enjoyment out of it all, since he did not know what would become of it after his time. as he stood there pondering, an old beggar woman came up to him and asked him for a trifle in heaven's name. she greeted him and curtsied, and asked what ailed the king, since he looked so sad.
"you can't do anything to help me, my good woman," said the king; "it's no use telling you."
"i am not so sure about that," said the beggar woman. "very little is wanted when luck is in the way. the king is thinking that he has no heir to his crown and kingdom, but he need not mourn on that account,"
she said. "the queen shall have three daughters, but great care must be taken that they do not come out under the open heavens before they are all fifteen years old; otherwise a snowdrift will come and carry them away."
when the time came the queen had a beautiful baby girl; the year after she had another, and the third year she also had a girl.
the king and queen were glad beyond all measure; but although the king was very happy, he did not forget to set a watch at the palace door, so that the princesses should not get out.
as they grew up they became both fair and beautiful, and all went well with them in every way. their only sorrow was that they were not allowed to go out and play like other children. for all they begged and prayed their parents, and for all they besought the sentinel, it was of no avail; go out they must not before they were fifteen years old, all of them.
so one day, not long before the fifteenth birthday of the youngest princess, the king and the queen were out driving, and the princesses were standing at the window and looking out. the sun was shining, and everything looked so green and beautiful that they felt that they must go out, happen what might. so they begged and entreated and urged the sentinel, all three of them, that he should let them down into the garden. "he could see for himself how warm and pleasant it was; no snowy weather could come on such a day." well, he didn't think it looked much like it either, and if they must go they had better go, the soldier said; but it must only be for a minute, and he himself would go with them and look after them.
when they got down into the garden they ran up and down, and filled their laps with flowers and green leaves, the prettiest they could find. at last they could manage no more, but just as they were going indoors they caught sight of a large rose at the other end of the garden. it was many times prettier than any they had gathered, so they must have that also. but just as they bent down to take the rose a big dense snowdrift came and carried them away.
there was great mourning over the whole country, and the king made known from all the churches that any one who could save the princesses should have half the kingdom and his golden crown and whichever princess he liked to choose.
you can well understand there were plenty who wanted to gain half the kingdom, and a princess into the bargain; so there were people of both high and low degree who set out for all parts of the country. but there was no one who could find the princesses, or even get any tidings of them.
when all the grand and rich people in the country had had their turn, a captain and a lieutenant came to the palace, and wanted to try their luck. the king fitted them out both with silver and gold, and wished them success on their journey.
then came a soldier, who lived with his mother in a little cottage some way from the palace. he had dreamt one night that he also was trying to find the princesses. when the morning came he still remembered what he had dreamt, and told his mother about it.
"some witchery must have got hold of you," said the woman, "but you must dream the same thing three nights running, else there is nothing in it." and the next two nights the same thing happened; he had the same dream, and he felt he must go. so he washed himself and put on his uniform, and went into the kitchen at the palace. it was the day after the captain and the lieutenant had set out.
"you had better go home again," said the king, "the princesses are beyond your reach, i should say; and besides, i have spent so much money on outfits that i have nothing left to-day. you had better come back another time."
"if i go, i must go to-day," said the soldier. "money i do not want; i only need a drop in my flask and some food in my wallet," he said; "but it must be a good walletful as much meat and bacon as i can carry."
yes, that he might have if that was all he wanted.
so he set off, and he had not gone many miles before he overtook the captain and the lieutenant.
"where are you going?" asked the captain, when he saw the man in uniform.
"i'm going to try if i can find the princesses," answered the soldier.
"so are we," said the captain, "and since your errand is the same, you may keep company with us, for if we don't find them, you are not likely to find them either, my lad," said he.
when they had gone awhile the soldier left the high road, and took a path into the forest.
"where are you going?" said the captain; "it is best to follow the high road."
"that may be," said the soldier, "but this is my way."
he kept to the path, and when the others saw this they turned round and followed him. away they went further and further, far across big moors and along narrow valleys.
and at last it became lighter, and when they had got out of the forest altogether they came to a long bridge, which they had to cross. but on that bridge a bear stood on guard. he rose on his hind legs and came towards them, as if he wanted to eat them.
"what shall we do now?" said the captain.
"they say that the bear is fond of meat," said the soldier, and then he threw a fore quarter to him, and so they got past. but when they reached the other end of the bridge, they saw a lion, which came roaring towards them with open jaws as if he wanted to swallow them.
"i think we had better turn right-about, we shall never be able to get past him alive," said the captain.
"oh, i don't think he is so very dangerous," said the soldier; "i have heard that lions are very fond of bacon, and i have half a pig in my wallet;" and then he threw a ham to the lion, who began eating and gnawing, and thus they got past him also.
in the evening they came to a fine big house. each room was more gorgeous than the other; all was glitter and splendour wherever they looked; but that did not satisfy their hunger. the captain and the lieutenant went round rattling their money, and wanted to buy some food; but they saw no people nor could they find a crumb of anything in the house, so the soldier offered them some food from his wallet, which they were not too proud to accept, nor did they want any pressing. they helped themselves of what he had as if they had never tasted food before.
the next day the captain said they would have to go out shooting and try to get something to live upon. close to the house was a large forest where there were plenty of hares and birds. the lieutenant was to remain at home and cook the remainder of the food in the soldier's wallet. in the meantime the captain and the soldier shot so much game that they were hardly able to carry it home. when they came to the door they found the lieutenant in such a terrible plight that he was scarcely able to open the door to them.
"what is the matter with you?" said the captain. the lieutenant then told them that as soon as they were gone a tiny, little man, with a long beard, who went on crutches, came in and asked so plaintively for a penny; but no sooner had he got it than he let it fall on the floor, and for all he raked and scraped with his crutch he was not able to get hold of it, so stiff and stark was he.
"i pitied the poor, old body," said the lieutenant, "and so i bent down to pick up the penny, but then he was neither stiff nor stark any longer. he began to belabour me with his crutches till very soon i was unable to move a limb."
"you ought to be ashamed of yourself! you, one of the king's officers, to let an old cripple give you a thrashing, and then tell people of it into the bargain!" said the captain. "pshaw! to-morrow i'll stop at home, and then you'll hear another story."
the next day the lieutenant and the soldier went out shooting and the captain remained at home to do the cooking and look after the house.
but if he fared no worse, he certainly fared no better than the lieutenant. in a little while the old man came in and asked for a penny. he let it fall as soon as he got it; gone it was and could not be found. so he asked the captain to help him to find it, and the captain, without giving a thought, bent down to look for it. but no sooner was he on his knees than the cripple began belabouring him with his crutches, and every time the captain tried to rise, he got a blow which sent him reeling. when the others came home in the evening, he still lay on the same spot and could neither see nor speak.
the third day the soldier was to remain at home, while the other two went out shooting. the captain said he must take care of himself, "for the old fellow will soon put an end to you, my lad," said he.
"oh, there can't be much life in one if such an old crook can take it," said the soldier.
they were no sooner outside the door, than the old man came in and asked for a penny again.
"money i have never owned," said the soldier, "but food i'll give you, as soon as it is ready," said he, "but if we are to get it cooked, you must go and cut the wood."
"that i can't," said the old man.
"if you can't, you must learn," said the soldier. "i will soon show you. come along with me down to the wood-shed." there he dragged out a heavy log and cut a cleft in it, and drove in a wedge till the cleft deepened.
"now you must lie down and look right along the cleft, and you'll soon learn how to cut wood," said the soldier. "in the meantime i'll show you how to use the axe."
the old man was not sufficiently cunning, and did as he was told; he lay down and looked steadily along the log. when the soldier saw the old man's beard had got well into the cleft, he struck out the wedge; the cleft closed and the old man was caught by the beard. the soldier began to beat him with the axe handle, and then swung the axe round his head, and vowed that he would split his skull if he did not tell him, there and then, where the princesses were.
"spare my life, spare my life, and i'll tell you!" said the old man.
"to the east of the house there is a big mound; on top of the mound you must dig out a square piece of turf, and then you will see a big stone slab. under that there is a deep hole through which you must let yourself down, and you'll then come to another world where you will find the princesses. but the way is long and dark and it goes both through fire and water."
when the soldier got to know this, he released the old man, who was not long in making off.
when the captain and lieutenant came home they were surprised to find the soldier alive. he told them what had happened from first to last, where the princesses were and how they should find them. they became as pleased as if they had already found them, and when they had had some food, they took with them a basket and as much rope as they could find, and all three set off to the mound. there they first dug out the turf just as the old man had told them, and underneath they found a big stone slab, which it took all their strength to turn over.
they then began to measure how deep it was; they joined on ropes both two and three times, but they were no nearer the bottom the last time than the first. at last they had to join all the ropes they had, both the coarse and fine, and then they found it reached the bottom.
the captain was, of course, the first who wanted to descend; "but when i tug at the rope you must make haste to drag me up again," he said.
he found the way both dark and unpleasant, but he thought he would go on as long as it became no worse. but all at once he felt ice cold water spouting about his ears; he became frightened to death and began tugging at the rope.
the lieutenant was the next to try, but it fared no better with him.
no sooner had he got through the flood of water than he saw a blazing fire yawning beneath him, which so frightened him that he also turned back.
the soldier then got into the bucket, and down he went through fire and water, right on till he came to the bottom, where it was so pitch dark that he could not see his hand before him. he dared not let go the basket, but went round in a circle, feeling and fumbling about him. at last he discovered a gleam of light far, far away like the dawn of day, and he went on in that direction.
when he had gone a bit it began to grow light around him, and before long he saw a golden sun rising in the sky and everything around him became as bright and beautiful as if in a fairy world.
first he came to some cattle, which were so fat that their hides glistened a long way off, and when he had got past them he came to a fine, big palace. he walked through many rooms without meeting anybody. at last he heard the hum of a spinning wheel, and when he entered the room he found the eldest princess sitting there spinning copper yarn; the room and everything in it was of brightly polished copper.
"oh, dear; oh, dear! what are christian people doing here?" said the princess. "heaven preserve you! what do you want?"
"i want to set you free and get you out of the mountain," said the soldier.
"pray do not stay. if the troll comes home he will put an end to you at once; he has three heads," said she.
"i do not care if he has four," said the soldier. "i am here, and here i shall remain."
"well, if you will be so headstrong, i must see if i can help you,"
said the princess.
she then told him to creep behind the big brewing vat which stood in the front hall; meanwhile she would receive the troll and scratch his heads till he went to sleep.
"and when i go out and call the hens you must make haste and come in,"
she said. "but you must first try if you can swing the sword which is lying on the table." no, it was too heavy, he could not even move it.
he had then to take a strengthening draught from the horn, which hung behind the door; after that he was just able to stir it, so he took another draught, and then he could lift it. at last he took a right, big draught, and he could swing the sword as easily as anything.
all at once the troll came home; he walked so heavily that the palace shook.
"ugh, ugh! i smell christian flesh and blood in my house," said he.
"yes," answered the princess, "a raven flew past here just now, and in his beak he had a human bone, which he dropped down the chimney; i threw it out and swept and cleaned up after it, but i suppose it still smells."
"so it does," said the troll.
"but come and lie down and i'll scratch your heads," said the princess; "the smell will be gone by the time you wake."
the troll was quite willing, and before long he fell asleep and began snoring. when she saw he was sleeping soundly, she placed some stools and cushions under his heads and went to call the hens. the soldier then stole into the room with the sword, and with one blow cut all the three heads off the troll.
the princess was as pleased as a fiddler, and went with the soldier to her sisters, so that he could also set them free. first of all they went across a courtyard and then through many long rooms till they came to a big door.
"here you must enter: here she is," said the princess. when he opened the door he found himself in a large hall, where everything was of pure silver; there sat the second sister at a silver spinning-wheel.
"oh, dear; oh, dear!" she said. "what do you want here?"
"i want to set you free from the troll," said the soldier.
"pray do not stay, but go," said the princess. "if he finds you here he will take your life on the spot."
"that would be awkward that is if i don't take his first," said the soldier.
"well, since you will stay," she said, "you will have to creep behind the big brewing-vat in the front hall. but you must make haste and come as soon as you hear me calling the hens."
first of all he had to try if he was able to swing the troll's sword, which lay on the table; it was much larger and heavier than the first one; he was hardly able to move it. he then took three draughts from the horn and he could then lift it, and when he had taken three more he could handle it as if it were a rolling pin.
shortly afterwards he heard a heavy, rumbling noise that was quite terrible, and directly afterwards a troll with six heads came in.
"ugh, ugh!" he said as soon as he got his noses inside the door. "i smell christian blood and bone in my house."
"yes, just think! a raven came flying past here with a thigh-bone, which he dropped down the chimney," said the princess. "i threw it out, but the raven brought it back again. at last i got rid of it and made haste to clean the room, but i suppose the smell is not quite gone," she said.
"no, i can smell it well," said the troll; but he was tired and put his heads in the princess's lap, and she went on scratching them till they all fell a-snoring. then she called the hens, and the soldier came and cut off all the six heads as if they were set on cabbage stalks.
she was no less glad than her elder sister, as you may imagine, and danced and sang; but in the midst of their joy they remembered their youngest sister. they went with the soldier across a large courtyard, and, after walking through many, many rooms, he came to the hall of gold where the third sister was.
she sat at a golden spinning-wheel spinning gold yarn, and the room from ceiling to floor glistened and glittered till it hurt one's eyes.
"heaven preserve both you and me, what do you want here?" said the princess. "go, go, else the troll will kill us both."
"just as well two as one," answered the soldier. the princess cried and wept; but it was all of no use, he must and would remain. since there was no help for it he would have to try if he could use the troll's sword on the table in the front hall. but he was only just able to move it; it was still larger and heavier than the other two swords.
he then had to take the horn down from the wall and take three draughts from it, but was only just able to stir the sword. when he had taken three more draughts he could lift it, and when he had taken another three he swung it as easily as if it had been a feather.
the princess then settled with the soldier to do the same as her sisters had done. as soon as the troll was well asleep she would call the hens, and he must then make haste and come in and put an end to the troll.
all of a sudden they heard such a thundering, rambling noise, as if the walls and roof were tumbling in.
"ugh! ugh! i smell christian blood and bone in my house," said the troll, sniffing with all his nine noses.
"yes, you never saw the like! just now a raven flew past here and dropped a human bone down the chimney. i threw it out, but the raven brought it back, and this went on for some time," said the princess; but she got it buried at last, she said, and she had both swept and cleaned the place, but she supposed it still smelt.
"yes, i can smell it well," said the troll.
"come here and lie down in my lap and i will scratch your heads," said the princess. "the smell will be all gone when you awake."
he did so, and when he was snoring at his best she put stools and cushions under the heads so that she could get away to call the hens.
the soldier then came in in his stockinged feet and struck at the troll, so that eight of the heads fell off at one blow. but the sword was too short and did not reach far enough; the ninth head woke up and began to roar.
"ugh! ugh! i smell a christian."
"yes, here he is," answered the soldier, and before the troll could get up and seize hold of him the soldier struck him another blow and the last head rolled along the floor.
you can well imagine how glad the princesses became now that they no longer had to sit and scratch the trolls' heads; they did not know how they could do enough for him who had saved them. the youngest princess took off her gold ring and knotted it in his hair. they then took with them as much gold and silver as they thought they could carry and set off on their way home.
as soon as they tugged at the rope the captain and the lieutenant pulled up the princesses, the one after the other. but when they were safely up, the soldier thought it was foolish of him not to have gone up before the princesses, for he had not very much belief in his comrades. he thought he would first try them, so he put a heavy lump of gold in the basket and got out of the way. when the basket was half-way up they cut the rope and the lump of gold fell to the bottom with such a crash that the pieces flew about his ears.
"now we are rid of him," they said, and threatened the princesses with their life if they did not say that it was they who had saved them from the trolls. they were forced to agree to this, much against their will, and especially the youngest princess; but life was precious, and so the two who were strongest had their way.
when the captain and lieutenant got home with the princesses you may be sure there were great rejoicings at the palace. the king was so glad he didn't know which leg to stand on; he brought out his best wine from his cupboard and wished the two officers welcome. if they had never been honoured before they were honoured now in full measure, and no mistake. they walked and strutted about the whole of the day, as if they were the cocks of the walk, since they were now going to have the king for father-in-law. for it was understood they should each have whichever of the princesses they liked and half the kingdom between them. they both wanted the youngest princess, but for all they prayed and threatened her it was of no use; she would not hear or listen to either.
they then asked the king if they might have twelve men to watch over her; she was so sad and melancholy since she had been in the mountain that they were afraid she might do something to herself.
yes, that they might have, and the king himself told the watch they must look well after her and follow her wherever she went and stood.
they then began to prepare for the wedding of the two eldest sisters; it should be such a wedding as never was heard or spoken of before, and there was no end to the brewing and the baking and the slaughtering.
in the meantime the soldier walked and strolled about down in the other world. he thought it was hard that he should see neither people nor daylight any more; but he would have to do something, he thought, and so for many days he went about from room to room and opened all the drawers and cupboards and searched about on the shelves and looked at all the fine things that were there. at last he came to a drawer in a table, in which there lay a golden key; he tried this key to all the locks he could find, but there was none it fitted till he came to a little cupboard over the bed, and in that he found an old rusty whistle. "i wonder if there is any sound in it," he thought, and put it to his mouth. no sooner had he whistled than he heard a whizzing and a whirring from all quarters, and such a large flock of birds swept down, that they blackened all the field in which they settled.
"what does our master want to-day?" they asked.
if he were their master, the soldier said, he would like to know if they could tell him how to get up to the earth again. no, none of them knew anything about that; "but our mother has not yet arrived," they said; "if she can't help you, no one can."
so he whistled once more, and shortly heard something flapping its wings far away, and then it began to blow so hard that he was carried away between the houses like a wisp of hay across the courtyard, and if he had not caught hold of the fence he would no doubt have been blown away altogether.
a big eagle bigger than you can imagine then swooped down in front of him.
"you come rather sharply," said the soldier.
"as you whistle so i come," answered the eagle. so he asked her if she knew any means by which he could get away from the world in which they were.
"you can't get away from here unless you can fly," said the eagle, "but if you will slaughter twelve oxen for me, so that i can have a really good meal, i will try and help you. have you got a knife?"
"no, but i have a sword," he said. when the eagle had swallowed the twelve oxen she asked the soldier to kill one more for victuals on the journey. "every time i gape you must be quick and fling a piece into my mouth," she said, "else i shall not be able to carry you up to earth."
he did as she asked him and hung two large bags of meat round her neck and seated himself among her feathers. the eagle then began to flap her wings and off they went through the air like the wind. it was as much as the soldier could do to hold on, and it was with the greatest difficulty he managed to throw the pieces of flesh into the eagle's mouth every time she opened it.
at last the day began to dawn, and the eagle was then almost exhausted and began flapping with her wings, but the soldier was prepared and seized the last hind quarter and flung it to her. then she gained strength and brought him up to earth. when she had sat and rested a while at the top of a large pine-tree she set off with him again at such a pace that flashes of lightning were seen both by sea and land wherever they went.
close to the palace the soldier got off and the eagle flew home again, but first she told him that if he at any time should want her he need only blow the whistle and she would be there at once.
in the meantime everything was ready at the palace, and the time approached when the captain and lieutenant were to be married with the two eldest princesses, who, however, were not much happier than their youngest sister; scarcely a day passed without weeping and mourning, and the nearer the wedding-day approached the more sorrowful did they become.
at last the king asked what was the matter with them; he thought it was very strange that they were not merry and happy now that they were saved and had been set free and were going to be married. they had to give some answer, and so the eldest sister said they never would be happy any more unless they could get such checkers as they had played with in the blue mountain.
that, thought the king, could be easily managed, and so he sent word to all the best and cleverest goldsmiths in the country that they should make these checkers for the princesses. for all they tried there was no one who could make them. at last all the goldsmiths had been to the palace except one, and he was an old, infirm man who had not done any work for many years except odd jobs, by which he was just able to keep himself alive. to him the soldier went and asked to be apprenticed. the old man was so glad to get him, for he had not had an apprentice for many a day, that he brought out a flask from his chest and sat down to drink with the soldier. before long the drink got into his head, and when the soldier saw this he persuaded him to go up to the palace and tell the king that he would undertake to make the checkers for the princesses.
he was ready to do that on the spot; he had made finer and grander things in his day, he said. when the king heard there was some one outside who could make the checkers he was not long in coming out.
"is it true what you say, that you can make such checkers as my daughters want?" he asked.
"yes, it is no lie," said the goldsmith; that he would answer for.
"that's well!" said the king. "here is the gold to make them with; but if you do not succeed you will lose your life, since you have come and offered yourself, and they must be finished in three days."
the next morning when the goldsmith had slept off the effects of the drink, he was not quite so confident about the job. he wailed and wept and blew up his apprentice, who had got him into such a scrape while he was drunk. the best thing would be to make short work of himself at once, he said, for there could be no hope for his life; when the best and grandest goldsmiths could not make such checkers, was it likely that he could do it?
"don't fret on that account," said the soldier, "but let me have the gold and i'll get the checkers ready in time; but i must have a room to myself to work in," he said. this he got, and thanks into the bargain.
the time wore on, and the soldier did nothing but lounge about, and the goldsmith began to grumble, because he would not begin with the work.
"don't worry yourself about it," said the soldier, "there is plenty of time! if you are not satisfied with what i have promised you had better make them yourself." the same thing went on both that day and the next; and when the smith heard neither hammer nor file from the soldier's room the whole of the last day, he quite gave himself up for lost; it was now no use to think any longer about saving his life, he thought.
but when the night came on the soldier opened the window and blew his whistle. the eagle then came and asked what he wanted.
"those gold checkers, which the princesses had in the blue mountain," said the soldier; "but you'll want something to eat first, i suppose? i have two ox carcases lying ready for you in the hay-loft yonder; you had better finish them," he said. when the eagle had done she did not tarry, and long before the sun rose she was back again with the checkers. the soldier then put them under his bed and lay down to sleep.
early next morning the goldsmith came and knocked at his door.
"what are you after now again?" asked the soldier. "you rush about enough in the day, goodness knows! if one cannot have peace when one is in bed, whoever would be an apprentice here?" said he.
neither praying nor begging helped that time; the goldsmith must and would come in, and at last he was let in.
and then, you may be sure, there was soon an end to his wailing.
but still more glad than the goldsmith were the princesses, when he came up to the palace with the checkers, and gladdest of all was the youngest princess.
"have you made them yourself?" she asked.
"no, if i must speak the truth, it is not i," he said, "but my apprentice, who has made them."
"i should like to see that apprentice," said the princess. in fact all three wanted to see him, and if he valued his life, he would have to come.
he was not afraid, either of women-folk or grand-folk, said the soldier, and if it could be any amusement to them to look at his rags, they should soon have that pleasure.
the youngest princess recognised him at once; she pushed the soldiers aside and ran up to him, gave him her hand, and said:
"good day, and many thanks for all you have done for us. it is he who freed us from the trolls in the mountain," she said to the king. "he is the one i will have!" and then she pulled off his cap and showed them the ring she had tied in his hair.
it soon came out how the captain and lieutenant had behaved, and so they had to pay the penalty of their treachery with their lives, and that was the end of their grandeur. but the soldier got the golden crown and half the kingdom, and married the youngest princess.
at the wedding they drank and feasted both well and long; for feast they all could, even if they could not find the princesses, and if they have not yet done feasting and drinking they must be at it still.
the cat on the dovrefell
once on a time there was a man up in finnmark who had caught a great white bear, which he was going to take to the king of denmark. now, it so fell out, that he came to the dovrefell just about christmas eve, and there he turned into a cottage where a man lived, whose name was halvor, and asked the man if he could get house-room there for his bear and himself.
"heaven never help me, if what i say isn't true!" said the man; "but we can't give anyone house-room just now, for every christmas eve such a pack of trolls come down upon us, that we are forced to flit, and haven't so much as a house over our own heads, to say nothing of lending one to anyone else."
"oh?" said the man, "if that's all, you can very well lend me your house; my bear can lie under the stove yonder, and i can sleep in the side-room."
well, he begged so hard, that at last he got leave to stay there; so the people of the house flitted out, and before they went, everything was got ready for the trolls; the tables were laid, and there was rice porridge, and fish boiled in lye, and sausages, and all else that was good, just as for any other grand feast.
so, when everything was ready, down came the trolls. some were great, and some were small; some had long tails, and some had no tails at all; some, too, had long, long noses; and they ate and drank, and tasted everything. just then one of the little trolls caught sight of the white bear, who lay under the stove; so he took a piece of sausage and stuck it on a fork, and went and poked it up against the bear's nose, screaming out:
"pussy, will you have some sausage?"
then the white bear rose up and growled, and hunted the whole pack of them out of doors, both great and small.
next year halvor was out in the wood, on the afternoon of christmas eve, cutting wood before the holidays, for he thought the trolls would come again; and just as he was hard at work, he heard a voice in the wood calling out:
"halvor! halvor!"
"well," said halvor, "here i am."
"have you got your big cat with you still?"
"yes, that i have," said halvor; "she's lying at home under the stove, and what's more, she has now got seven kittens, far bigger and fiercer than she is herself."
"oh, then, we'll never come to see you again," bawled out the troll away in the wood, and he kept his word; for since that time the trolls have never eaten their christmas brose with halvor on the dovrefell.
one's own children are always prettiest
a sportsman went out once into a wood to shoot, and he met a snipe.
"dear friend," said the snipe, "don't shoot my children!"
"how shall i know your children?" asked the sportsman. "what are they like?"
"oh!" said the snipe, "mine are the prettiest children in all the wood."
"very well," said the sportsman, "i'll not shoot them; don't be afraid."
but for all that, when he came back, there he had a whole string of young snipes in his hand which he had shot.
"oh, oh!" said the snipe, "why did you shoot my children after all?"
"what! these your children!" said the sportsman; "why, i shot the ugliest i could find, that i did!"
"woe is me!" said the snipe; "don't you know that each one thinks his own children the prettiest in the world?"
among the forest people
mr. red squirrel comes to live in the forest
life in the forest is very different from life in the meadow, and the forest people have many ways of doing which are not known in the world outside. they are a quiet people and do not often talk or sing when there are strangers near. you could never get acquainted with them until you had learned to be quiet also, and to walk through the underbrush without snapping twigs at every step. then, if you were to live among them and speak their language, you would find that there are many things about which it is not polite to talk. and there is a reason for all this.
in the meadow, although they have their quarrels and their own troubles, they always make it up again and are friendly, but in the forest there are some people who can never get along well together, and who do not go to the same parties or call upon each other. it is not because they are cross, or selfish, or bad. it is just because of the way in which they have to live and hunt, and they cannot help it any more than you could help having eyes of a certain color.
these are things which are all understood in the forest, and the people there are careful what they say and do, so they get on very well indeed, and have many happy times in that quiet, dusky place. when people are born there, they learn these things without thinking about it, but when they come there from some other place it is very hard, for everybody thinks it stupid in strangers to ask about such simple matters.
when mr. red squirrel first came to the forest, he knew nothing of the way in which they do, and he afterward said that learning forest manners was even harder than running away from his old home. you see, mr. red squirrel was born in the forest, but was carried away from there when he was only a baby. from that time until he was grown, he had never set claw upon a tree, and all he could see of the world he had seen by peeping through the bars of a cage. his cousins in the forest learned to frisk along the fence-tops and to jump from one swaying branch to another, but when this poor little fellow longed for a scamper he could only run around and around in a wire wheel that hummed as it turned, and this made him very dizzy.
he used to wonder if there were nothing better in life, for he had been taken from his woodland home when he was too young to remember about it.
one day he saw another squirrel outside, a dainty little one who looked as though she had never a sad thought. that made him care more than ever to be free, and when he curled down in his cotton nest that night he dreamed about her, and that they were eating acorns together in a tall oak tree.
the next day mr. red squirrel pretended to be sick. he would not run in the wheel or taste the food in his cage. when his master came to look at him, he moaned pitifully and would not move one leg. his master thought that the leg was broken, and took limp little mr. red squirrel in his hand to the window to see what was the matter. the window was up, and when he saw his chance, mr. red squirrel leaped into the open air and was away to the forest. his poor legs were weak from living in such a small cage, but how he ran! his heart thumped wildly under the soft fur of his chest, and his breath came in quick gasps, and still he ran, leaping, scrambling, and sometimes falling, but always nearer the great green trees of his birthplace.
at last he was safe and sat trembling on the lowest branch of a beech-tree. the forest was a new world to him and he asked many questions of a fat, old gray squirrel. the gray squirrel was one of those people who know a great deal and think that they know a great, great deal, and want others to think so too. he was so very knowing and important that, although he answered all of mr. red squirrel's questions, he really did not tell him any of the things which he most wanted to know, and this is the way in which they talked:
"what is the name of this place?" asked mr. red squirrel.
"this? why this is the forest, of course," answered the gray squirrel.
"we have no other name for it. it is possible that there are other forests in the world, but they cannot be so fine as this, so we call ours 'the forest.'"
"are there pleasant neighbors here?" asked mr. red squirrel.
"very good, very good. my wife and i do not call on many of them, but still they are good enough people, i think."
"then why don't you call?"
"why? why? because they are not in our set. it would never do." and the gray squirrel sat up very straight indeed.
"who is that gliding fellow on the ground below?" asked the newcomer.
"is he one of your friends?"
"that? that is the rattlesnake. we never speak to each other. there has always been trouble between our families."
"who lives in that hollow tree yonder?"
"sh, sh! that is where the great horned owl has his home. he is asleep now and must not be awakened, for squirrels and owls cannot be friendly."
"why not?"
"because. it has always been so."
"and who is that bird just laying an egg in her nest above us?"
"speak softly, please. that is the cowbird, and it is not her nest. you will get into trouble if you talk such things aloud. she can't help it.
she has to lay her eggs in other birds' nests, but they don't like it."
mr. red squirrel tried very hard to find out the reason for this, but there are always some things for which no reason can be given; and there are many questions which can never be answered, even if one were to ask, "why? why? why?" all day long. so mr. red squirrel, being a wise little fellow, stopped asking, and thought by using his eyes and ears he would in time learn all that he needed to know. he had good eyes and keen ears, and he learned very fast without making many mistakes. he had a very happy life among the forest people, and perhaps that was one reason. he learned not to say things which made his friends feel badly, and he did not ask needless questions. and after all, you know, it would have been very foolish to ask questions which nobody could answer, and worse than foolish to ask about matters which he could find out for himself.
it is in the forest as in the world outside. we can know that many things are, but we never know why they are.
why mr great horned owl hatched the eggs
if the rattlesnake is the king of the forest in the daytime, the great horned owl is the king at night. indeed, he is much the more powerful of the two, for he is king of air and earth alike and can go wherever he wishes, while the snake can only rule over those who live near the ground or who are so careless as to come to him there.
there was but one pair of great horned owls in the forest, and they lived in the deepest shade, having their great clumsy nest in the hollow of a tall tree. you might have walked past it a hundred times and never have guessed that any owls lived there, if you did not notice the round pellets of bone and hair on the grass. they are such hungry fellows that they swallow their food with the bones in it. then their tough little stomachs go to work, rolling all the pieces of bone and hair into balls and sending them back to be cast out of the owls' mouths to the ground.
the great horned owl was a very large bird. his whole body was covered with brown, dull yellow, and white feathers. even his feet and legs were covered, and all that you could see besides were his black claws and his black hooked bill. yes, at night you could see his eyes, too, and they were wonderful great eyes that could see in the dark, but they were shut in the daytime when he was resting. his wife, who was the queen of the forest at night, looked exactly like him, only she was larger than he. and that is the way among owls, the wife is always larger than her husband.
every night when the sun had gone down, the great horned owl and his wife would come out of their hollow tree and sit blinking on a branch near by, waiting until it got dark enough for them to see quite plainly.
as the light faded, the little black spots in their eyes would grow bigger and bigger, and then off they would go on their great soft, noiseless wings, hunting in the grass and among the branches for the supper which they called breakfast.
mrs. owl could not be gone very long at a time, for there were two large round white eggs in the nest which must not get cold. her husband was on the wing most of the night, and he often flew home with some tender morsel for her. he was really a kind-hearted fellow, although you could never have made the small birds think so. sometimes his wife would sigh and tell how tired she was of sitting still, and how glad she would be when the eggs were hatched and she could go more with him. when she began to speak of that, the great horned owl would get ready for another flight and go off saying: "it is too bad. i am so sorry for you. but then, one would never have young owlets if one didn't stick to the nest." he was always proud of his children, and he thought himself a very good husband. perhaps he was; still he had never taken his place on the nest while his wife went hunting.
one night, after they had both been flying through forest and over field, he came back to the hollow tree to rest. he expected to find mrs.
owl, for she had started home before he did. she was not there and he grew quite impatient. "i should like to know what keeps her so long," he said, fretfully. after a while he looked into the nest and saw the two big white eggs. "it is a shame," he said. "our beautiful eggs will be chilled, and it will be all her fault if we have no owlets this summer."
you see, even then he did not seem to think that he could do anything to keep them warm. but the next time he looked in, he put one feathered foot on the round eggs and was surprised to find how cool they were.
it fairly made his head feathers stand on end to think of it, and he was so frightened that he forgot to be cross, and stepped right in and covered them with his own breast. what if they had already been left too long, and the owlets within would never hatch? would mrs. owl ever forgive him for being so stupid? he began to wonder if any of the other fellows would see him. he thought it so absurd for the king of the forest to be hatching out a couple of eggs, instead of swooping around in the dark and frightening the smaller birds.
the night seemed so long, too. it had always been short enough before, and he had often disliked to have daylight come, for then he had to go to bed. he was very much upset, and it is no wonder that when he heard a doleful wail from a neighboring tree, and knew that his cousin, the screech owl, was near, he raised his head and called loudly, "hoo-hoo-oooo! waugh-hoo!"
the screech owl heard him and flew at once to a branch beside the nest hollow. he was a jolly little fellow in spite of his doleful call, and before he could talk at all he had to bend his body, look behind him, nod his head, and shake himself, as screech owls always do when they alight. then he looked into the tree and saw his big cousin, the great horned owl, the night king of the forest, sitting on the eggs and looking very, very grumpy. how he did laugh! "what is the matter?" said he. "didn't you like your wife's way of brooding over the eggs? or did she get tired of staying at home and make you help tend the nest?"
"matter enough," grumbled the great horned owl. "we went hunting together at twilight and she hasn't come home yet. i didn't get into the nest until i had to, but it was growing very cold and i wouldn't miss having our eggs hatch for anything. ugh-whoo! how my legs do ache!"
"well," said his cousin, "you are having a hard time. are you hungry?"
the great horned owl said that he was, so the screech owl went hunting and brought him food. "i will look in every night," he said, "and bring you a lunch. i'm afraid something has happened to your wife and that she will not be back."
as he flew away he called out, "it is too bad. i am very sorry for you. but then, i suppose you would never have the owlets if you didn't stick to the nest."
this last remark made the great horned owl quite angry. "much he knows about it," he said. "i guess if he had ever tried it he would be a little more sorry for me." and then he began to think, "who have i heard say those very words before? who? who? who?"
all at once the great horned owl remembered how many times he had said just that to his patient wife, and he began to feel very uncomfortable.
his ears tingled and he felt a queer hot feeling under his face feathers. perhaps he hadn't been acting very well after all! he knew that even when he told her he was sorry, he had been thinking she made a great fuss. well, if she would only come back now, that should all be changed, and he shifted his weight and wriggled around into a more comfortable position.
now, if this were just a story, one could say that mrs. owl came back and that they were all happy together; but the truth is she never did come, and nobody ever knew what became of her. so her husband, the night king of the forest, had to keep the eggs warm and rear his own owlets.
you can imagine how glad he was on the night when he first heard them tapping on the inside of their shells, for then he knew that he would soon be free to hunt.
a finer pair of children were never hatched, and their father thought them far ahead of all his other broods. "if only mrs. owl were here to see them, how lovely it would be!" he said. yet if she had been there he would never have had the pleasure of hearing their first faint cheeps, and of covering them with his soft breast feathers as he did each day. he forgot now all the weary time when he sat with aching legs, wishing that his cousin would happen along with something to eat. for that is always the way, when we work for those we love, the weariness is soon forgotten and only happiness remains.
it is said that the screech owl was more thoughtful of his wife after his cousin had to hatch the eggs, and it is too bad that some of the other forest people could not have learned the same lesson; but the great horned owl never told, and the screech owl kept his secret, and to this day there are many people in the forest who know nothing whatever about it.
the swaggering crow
when the crows who have been away for the winter return to the forest, all their relatives gather on the tree-tops to welcome them and tell the news. those who have been away have also much to say, and it sometimes seems as though they were all talking at once. they spend many days in visiting before they begin nest-building. perhaps if they would take turns and not interrupt each other, they would get the news more quickly, for when people are interrupted they can never talk well.
sometimes, too, one hungry fellow will fly off for a few mouthfuls of grain, and get back just in time to hear the end of a story. then he will want to hear the first part of it, and make such a fuss that they have to tell it all over again just for him.
at this time in the spring, you can hear their chatter and laughter, even when you are far away; and the song-birds of the forest look at each other and say, "dear me! the crows are back." they have very good reasons for disliking the crows, as any robin will tell you.
there was one great shining black crow who had the loudest voice of all, and who was not at all afraid to use it. this spring he looked very lean and lank, for it had been a long, cold winter, and he had found but little to eat, acorns, the seeds of the wild plants, and once in a great while a frozen apple that hung from its branch in some lonely orchard.
he said that he felt as though he could reach around his body with one claw, and when a crow says that he feels exceedingly thin. but now spring was here, and his sisters and his cousins and his aunts, yes, and his brothers and his uncles, too, had returned to the forest to live. he had found two good dinners already, all that he could eat and more too, and he began to feel happy and bold. the purple gloss on his feathers grew brighter every day, and he was glad to see this. he wanted to look so handsome that a certain miss crow, a sister of one of his friends, would like him better than she did any of the others.
that was all very well, if he had been at all polite about it. but one day he saw her visiting with another crow, and he lost his temper, and flew at him, and pecked him about the head and shoulders, and tore the long fourth feather from one of his wings, besides rumpling the rest of his coat. then he went away. he had beaten him by coming upon him from behind, like the sneak that he was, and he was afraid that if he waited he might yet get the drubbing he deserved. so he flew off to the top of a hemlock-tree where the other crows were, and told them how he had fought and beaten. you should have seen him swagger around when he told it. each time it was a bigger story, until at last he made them think that the other crow hadn't a tail feather left.
the next day, a number of crows went to a farm not far from the forest.
miss crow was in the party. on their way they stopped in a field where there stood a figure of a man with a dreadful stick in his hand.
everybody was frightened except mr. crow. he wanted to show how much courage he had, so he flew right up to it. they all thought him very brave. they didn't know that down in his heart he was a great coward. he wasn't afraid of this figure because he knew all about it. he had seen it put up the day before, and he knew that there was no man under the big straw hat and the flapping coat. he knew that, instead of a thinking, breathing person, there was only a stick nailed to a pole. he knew that, instead of having two good legs with which to run, this figure had only the end of a pole stuck into the ground.
of course, he might have told them all, and then they could have gathered corn from the broken ground around, but he didn't want to do that. instead, he said, "do you see that terrible great creature with a stick in his hand? he is here just to drive us away, but he dares not touch me. he knows i would beat him if he did." then he flew down, and ate corn close beside the figure, while the other crows stood back and cawed with wonder.
when he went back to them, he said to miss crow, "you see how brave i am. if i were taking care of anybody, nothing could ever harm her." and he looked tenderly at her with his little round eyes. but she pretended not to understand what he meant, for she did not wish to give up her pleasant life with the flock and begin nest-building just yet.
when they reached the barn-yard, there was rich picking, and mr. crow made such a clatter that you would have thought he owned it all and that the others were only his guests. he flew down on the fence beside a couple of harmless hens, and he flapped his wings and swaggered around until they began to sidle away. then he grew bolder (you know bullies always do if they find that people are scared), and edged up to them until they fluttered off, squawking with alarm.
next he walked into the hen-house, saying to the other crows, "you might have a good time, too, if you were not such cowards." he had no more than gotten the words out of his bill, when the door of the hen-house blew shut and caught there. it was a grated door and he scrambled wildly to get through the openings. while he was trying, he heard the hoarse voice of the crow whom he had beaten the day before, saying, "thank you, we are having a fairly good time as it is"; and he saw miss crow picking daintily at some corn which the speaker had scratched up for her.
at that minute the great black brahma cock came up behind mr. crow. he had heard from the hens how rude mr. crow had been, and he thought that as the head of the house he ought to see about it. well! one cannot say very much about what happened next, but the black brahma cock did see about it quite thoroughly, and when the hen-house door swung open, it was a limp, ragged, and meek-looking crow who came out, leaving many of his feathers inside.
the next morning mr. crow flew over the forest and far away. he did not want to go back there again. he heard voices as he passed a tall tree by the edge of the forest. miss crow was out with the crow whom he had beaten, and they were looking for a good place in which to build. "i don't think they will know me if they see me," said mr. crow, "and i am sure that i don't want them to."
the red-headed woodpecker children
mrs. red-headed woodpecker bent her handsome head down and listened.
"yes, it is! it certainly is!" she cried, as she heard for a second time the faint "tap-tap-tap" of a tiny beak rapping on the inside of an egg shell. she hopped to one side of her nest and stood looking at the four white eggs that lay there. soon the rapping was heard again and she saw one of them move a bit on its bed of chips.
"so it is that one," she cried. "i thought it would be. i was certain that i laid that one first." and she arched her neck proudly, as the beak of her eldest child came through a crack in the shell. now nobody else could have told one egg from another, but mothers have a way of remembering such things, and it may be because they love their children so that sometimes their sight is a little sharper, and their hearing a little keener than anybody else's.
however that may be, she stood watching while the tiny bird chipped away the shell and squeezed out of the opening he had made. she did not even touch a piece of the shell until he was well out of it, for she knew that it is always better for children to help themselves when they can.
it makes them strong and fits them for life. when the little red-headed woodpecker had struggled free, she took the broken pieces in her beak and carried them far from the nest before dropping them to the ground.
if she had done the easiest thing and let them fall by the foot of the hollow tree where she lived, any prowling weasel or blue jay might have seen them and watched for a chance to reach her babies. and that would have been very sad for the babies.
the newly hatched bird was a tired little fellow, and the first thing he did was to take a nap. he was cold, too, although the weather was fine and sunshiny. his down was all wet from the moisture inside the egg, and you can imagine how he felt, after growing for so long inside a warm, snug shell, to suddenly be without it and know that he could never again have it around him. even if it had been whole once more, he could not have been packed into it, for he had been stretching and growing every minute since he left it. it is for this reason that the barn-yard people have a wise saying: "a hatched chicken never returns to his shell."
when mrs. red-headed woodpecker came back, she covered her shivering little one with her downy breast, and there he slept, while she watched for her husband's coming, and thought how pleased and proud he would be to see the baby. they were a young couple, and this was their first child.
but who can tell what the other three children, who had not cracked the shell, were thinking? could they remember the time when they began to be? could they dream of what would happen after they were hatched? could they think at all? they were tiny, weak creatures, curled up within their shells, with food packed all around them. there had been a time when they were only streaks in the yellow liquid of the eggs. now they were almost ready to leave this for a fuller, freer life, where they could open their bills and flutter their wings, and stretch their legs and necks. it had been a quiet, sheltered time in the shell; why should they leave it? ah, but they must leave it, for they were healthy and growing, and when they had done so, they would forget all about it. by the time they could talk, and that would be very soon, they would have forgotten all that happened before they were hatched. that is why you can never get a bird to tell you what he thought about while in the egg.
after the young woodpecker's three sisters reached the outside world, the father and mother were kept busy hunting food for them, and they were alone much of the time. it was not long before they knew their parents' voices, although, once in a while, before they got their eyes open, they mistook the call of the tree frog below for that of the woodpeckers. and this was not strange, for each says, "ker-r-ruck!
ker-r-ruck!" and when the tree frog was singing in his home at the foot of the tree, the four woodpecker children, in their nest-hollow far above his head, would be opening their bills and stretching their necks, and wondering why no juicy and delicious morsel was dropped down their throats.
when they had their eyes open there was much to be seen. at least, they thought so. was there not the hollow in their dear, dry old tree, a hollow four or five times as high as they could reach? their mother had told them how their father and she had dug it out with their sharp, strong bills, making it roomy at the bottom, and leaving a doorway at the top just large enough for them to pass through. part of the chips they had taken away, as the mother had taken the broken shells, and part had been left in the bottom of the hollow for the children to lie on. "i don't believe in grass, hair, and down, as a bed for children," their father had said. "nice soft chips are far better."
and the woodpecker children liked the chips, and played with them, and pretended that they were grubs to be caught with their long and bony tongues; only of course they never swallowed them.
it was an exciting time when their feathers began to grow. until then they had been clothed in down; but now the tiny quills came pricking through their skin, and it was not so pleasant to snuggle up to each other as it had once been. now, too, the eldest of the family began to show a great fault. he was very vain. you can imagine how sorry his parents were.
every morning when he awakened he looked first of all at his feathers.
those on his breast were white, and he had a white band on his wings.
his tail and back and nearly the whole of his wings were blue-black. his head, neck, and throat were crimson. to be sure, while the feathers were growing, the colors were not very bright, for the down was mixed with them, and the quills showed so plainly that the young birds looked rather streaked.
the sisters were getting their new suits at the same time, and there was just as much reason why they should be vain, but they were not. they were glad (as who would not be?) and they often said to each other: "how pretty you are growing!" they looked exactly like their brother, for it is not with the woodpeckers as with many other birds, the sons and daughters are dressed in precisely the same way.
as for the vain young woodpecker, he had many troubles. he was not contented to let his feathers grow as the grass and the leaves grow, without watching. no indeed! he looked at each one every day and a great many times every day. then, if he thought they were not growing as fast as they should, he worried about it. he wanted to hurry them along, and sometimes, when his sisters did not seem to be looking, he took hold of them with his bill and pulled. of course this did not make them grow any faster and it did make his skin very sore, but how was he to know? he had not been out of the shell long enough to be wise.
it troubled him, too, because he could not see his red feathers. he twisted his head this way and that, and strained his eyes until they ached, trying to see his own head and neck. it was very annoying. he thought it would have been much nicer to have the brightest feathers in a fellow's tail, where he could see them, or at any rate on his breast; and he asked his mother why it couldn't be so.
"i once knew a young woodpecker," she said, "who thought of very little but his own beauty. i am afraid that if he had been allowed to wear his red feathers in his tail, he would never have seen anything else in this wonderful great world, but just his own poor little tail." she looked out of the doorway as she spoke, but he knew that she meant him.
things went on in this way until the children were ready to fly. then there were daily lessons in flying, alighting, clinging to branches, and tapping for food on the bark of trees. they learned, too, how to support themselves with their stiff tails when they were walking up trees or stopping to eat with their claws hooked into the bark. then mrs.
red-headed woodpecker taught them how to tell the ripest and sweetest fruit on the trees before they tasted it. that is something many people would like to know, but it is a forest secret, and no bird will tell anyone who cannot fly.
it was on his way back from an orchard one day, that the vain young woodpecker stopped to talk with an old gray squirrel. it may be that the gray squirrel's sight was not good, and so he mistook the woodpecker for quite another fellow. he was speaking of an old tree where he had spent the last winter. "i believe a family of red-headed woodpeckers live there now," he said. "i have met them once or twice. the father and mother are fine people, and they have charming daughters, but their son must be a great trial to them. he is one of these silly fellows who see the world through their own feathers."
as the young red-headed woodpecker flew away, he repeated this to himself: "a silly fellow, a silly fellow, who sees the world through his own feathers." and he said to his father, "whose feathers must i look through?"
this puzzled his father. "whose feathers should you look through?" said he. "what do you mean?"
"well," answered the son, "somebody said that i saw the world through my own feathers, and i don't see how i can get anybody else's."
how his father did laugh! "i don't see why you should look through any feathers," said he. "what he meant was that you thought so much of your own plumage that you did not care for anything else; and it is so. if it were intended you should look at yourself all the time, your eyes would have been one under your chin and the other in the back of your head.
no! they are placed right for you to look at other people, and are where they help you hunt for food."
"how often may i look at my own feathers?" asked the young woodpecker.
he was wondering at that minute how his tail looked, but he was determined not to turn his head.
the old woodpecker's eyes twinkled. "i should think," he said, "that since you are young and have no family to look after, you might preen your feathers in the morning and in the afternoon and when you go to sleep. then, of course, when it is stormy, you will have to take your waterproof out of the pocket under your tail, and put it on one feather at a time, as all birds do. that would be often enough unless something happened to rumple them."
"i will not look at them any oftener," said the young red-headed woodpecker, firmly. "i will not be called a silly fellow." and he was as good as his word.
his mother sighed when she heard of the change. "i am very glad," said she. "but isn't that always the way? his father and i have talked and talked, and it made no difference; but let somebody else say he is silly and vain, and behold!"
the night moth with a crooked feeler
the beautiful, brilliant butterflies of the meadow had many cousins living in the forest, most of whom were night moths. they also were very beautiful creatures, but they dressed in duller colors and did not have slender waists. some of the butterflies, you know, wear whole gowns of black and yellow, others have stripes of black and white, while some have clear yellow with only a bit of black trimming the edges of the wings.
the moths usually wear brown and have it brightened with touches of buff or dull blue. if they do wear bright colors, it is only on the back pair of wings, and when the moth alights, he slides his front pair of wings over these and covers all the brightness. they do not rest with their wings folded over their heads like the butterflies, but leave them flat.
all the day long, when the sun is shining, the moths have to rest on trees and dead leaves. if they were dressed in yellow or red, any passing bird would see them, and there is no telling what might happen.
as it is, their brown wings are so nearly the color of dead leaves or bark that you might often look right at them without seeing them.
yet even among moths there are some more brightly colored than others, and when you find part of the family quietly dressed you can know it is because they have to lay the eggs. moths are safer in dull colors, and the egg-layers should always be the safest of all. if anything happened to them, you know, there would be no caterpillar babies.
one day a fine-looking cecropia moth came out of her chrysalis and clung to the nearest twig while her wings grew and dried and flattened. at first they had looked like tiny brown leaves all drenched with rain and wrinkled by somebody's stepping on them. the fur on her fat body was matted and wet, and even her feelers were damp and stuck to her head.
her six beautiful legs were weak and trembling, and she moved her body restlessly while she tried again and again to raise her crumpled wings.
she had not been there so very long before she noticed another cecropia moth near her, clinging to the under side of a leaf. he was also just out of the chrysalis and was drying himself. "good morning!" he cried.
"i think i knew you when we were caterpillars. fine day to break the chrysalis, isn't it?"
"lovely," she answered. "i remember you very well. you were the caterpillar who showed me where to find food last summer when the hot weather had withered so many of the plants."
"i thought you would recall me," he said. "and when we were spinning our chrysalides we visited together. do you remember that also?"
miss cecropia did. she had been thinking of that when she first spoke, but she hoped he had forgotten. to tell the truth, he had been rather fond of her the fall before, and she, thinking him the handsomest caterpillar of her acquaintance, had smiled upon him and suggested that they spin their cocoons near together. during the long winter she had regretted this. "i was very foolish," she thought, "to encourage him.
when i get my wings i may meet people who are better off than he. now i shall have to be polite to him for the sake of old friendship. i only hope that he will make other acquaintances and leave me free. i must get into the best society."
all this time her neighbor was thinking, "i am so glad to see her again, so glad, so glad! when my wings are dry i will fly over to her and we will go through the forest together." he was a kind, warm-hearted fellow, who cared more for friendship than for beauty or family.
meanwhile their wings were growing fast, and drying, and flattening, so that by noon they could begin to raise them above their heads. they were very large moths and their wings were of a soft dust color with little clear, transparent places in them and touches of the most beautiful blue, quite the shade worn by the peacock, who lived on the farm. there was a brown and white border to their wings, and on their bodies and legs the fur was white and dark orange. when the cecropias rest, they spread their wings out flat, and do not slide the front pair over the others as their cousins, the sphinxes, do. the most wonderful of all, though, are their feelers.
the butterflies have stiff feelers on their heads with little knobs on the ends, or sometimes with part of them thick like tiny clubs. the night moths have many kinds of feelers, most of them being curved, and those of the cecropias look like reddish-brown feathers pointed at the end.
miss cecropia's feelers were perfect, and she waved them happily to and fro. those of her friend, she was troubled to see, were not what they should have been. one of them was all right, the other was small and crooked. "oh dear," she said to herself, "how that does look! i hope he will not try to be attentive to me." he did not mind it much. he thought about other things than looks.
as night came, a polyphemus moth fluttered past. "good evening!" cried he. "are you just out? there are a lot of cecropias coming out to-day."
miss cecropia felt quite agitated when she heard this, and wondered if she looked all right. her friend flew over to her just as she raised her wings for flight. "let me go with you," he said.
while she was wondering how she could answer him, several other cecropias came along. they were all more brightly colered than she.
"hullo!" cried one of them, as he alighted beside her. "first-rate night, isn't it?"
he was a handsome fellow, and his feelers were perfect; but miss cecropia did not like his ways, and she drew away from him just as her friend knocked him off the branch. while they were fighting, another of the strangers flew to her. "may i sit here?" he asked.
"yes," she murmured, thinking her chance had come to get into society.
"i must say that it served the fellow right for his rudeness to you,"
said the stranger, in his sweetest way; "but who is the moth who is punishing him that queer-looking one with a crooked feeler?"
"sir," said she, moving farther from him, "he is a friend of mine, and i do not think it matters to you if he is queer-looking."
"oh!" said the stranger. "oh! oh! oh! you have a bad temper, haven't you? but you are very good-looking in spite of that." there is no telling what he would have said next, for at this minute miss cecropia's friend heard the mean things he was saying, and flew against him.
it was not long before this stranger also was punished, and then the moth with the crooked feeler turned to the others. "do any of you want to try it?" he said. "you must understand that you cannot be rude before her." and he pointed his right fore leg at miss cecropia as she sat trembling on the branch.
"her!" they cried mockingly, as they flew away. "there are prettier moths than she. we don't care anything for her."
miss cecropia's friend would have gone after them to punish them for this impoliteness, but she clung to him and begged him not to. "you will be killed, i know you will," she sobbed. "and then what will become of me?"
"would you miss me?" he asked, as he felt of one of his wings, now broken and bare.
"yes," she cried. "you are the best friend i have. please don't go."
"but i am such a homely fellow," he said. "i don't see how you can like me since i broke my wing."
"well, i do like you," she said. "your wing isn't much broken after all, and i like your crooked feeler. it is so different from anybody else's." miss cecropia looked very happy as she spoke, and she quite forgot how she once decided to go away from him. there are some people, you know, who can change their minds in such a sweet and easy way that we almost love them the better for it. one certainly could love miss cecropia for this, because it showed that she had learned to care more for a warm heart and courage than for whole wings and straight feelers.
mr. cecropia did not live long after this, unfortunately, but they were very, very happy together, and she often said to her friends, as she laid her eggs in the best places, "i only hope that when my caterpillar babies are grown and have come out of their chrysalides, they may be as good and as brave as their father was."
the bees and the kingbird
there was in the forest a great hollow tree where for years a swarm of bees had made their home. to look at it in winter, one would never guess what a store of honey was sealed up within, but in summer the bees were always passing in and out, and it was indeed a busy place. then the workers had to gather honey and build the cells and look out for the queen-mother's many babies. the queen-mother had so much care of her eggs that she could really do nothing but attend to them. after they were ready in their cells, the workers took care of them, and tucked in a lot of bread for the babies to eat when they were hatched. then there was the bread-making to be done also, and all the workers helped bring the pollen, or flower-dust, out of which it was made.
the drones didn't do anything, not a thing, not a single thing, unless it were taking care of the queen when she flew away from the tree. they had done that once, but it was long ago, before she had laid an egg and while she was still quite young. they were handsome great fellows, all black and gold, and if you didn't know about them, you might have thought them the pleasantest bees in the tree. of course you would not care for them after finding how lazy they were, for people are never liked just because they are fine-looking.
the drones always found some excuse for being idle, and like many other lazy people they wanted the busy ones to stop and visit with them. "what is the hurry?" they would say. "there will be more honey that you can get to-morrow. stop a while now."
but the workers would shake their brown heads and buzz impatiently as they answered, "we can get to-morrow's honey when to-morrow comes, but to-day's honey must be gathered to-day."
then the drones would grumble and say that they didn't see the sense of storing up so much honey anyway. that also was like lazy people the world over, for however much they scold about getting the food, they are sure to eat just as much as anybody else. sometimes lazy people eat even more than others, and pick for the best too.
on cloudy days, the workers did stay at home in the tree, but not to play. they clung to the walls and to each other and made wax. it took much patience to make wax. when they were gathering honey there was so much that was interesting to be seen, and so many friends to meet, that it was really quite exciting; but when they made wax they had to hang for a long, long time, until the wax gathered in flakes over their bodies. then it was ready to scrape off and shape into six-sided cells to hold honey or to be homes for the babies.
one sunshiny morning the queen-mother stopped laying her eggs and cried:
"listen! did you hear that?"
"what?" asked the workers, crowding around her.
"why, that noise," she said. "it sounded like a bird calling 'kyrie!
k-y-rie!' and i thought i heard a worker buzzing outside a minute ago, but no one has come in. i am afraid " and here she stopped.
"of what are you afraid!" asked the drones, who, having nothing to do but eat and sleep, were always ready to talk about anything and everything. the great trouble with them was that if you once began to talk they did not like to have you leave and go to work.
"why," said the queen-mother, "i don't want to alarm you, but i thought it was a kingbird."
"well, what if it was?" said a big drone. "there is only one of him and there are a great many of us."
"yes," said the queen-mother, "but there may not be so many of us very long if he begins to watch the tree. i have lived much longer than you and i know how kingbirds act."
this was true, for queens live to be very old, and drones never live long because they are so lazy.
"well," said the big drone, "we must find out about this. just fly around and see if it is a kingbird," he said to a worker. "we must know about things before we act."
"suppose you should go," she replied. "i have my leg-pockets full of pollen, and it ought to be made into bread at once. i never saw larvæ so hungry as these last ones are."
"i only wish that i could go," said the big drone, limping as he got out of her way; "but my fifth foot just stepped on my third foot, and i can hardly move."
when he said this, all the workers smiled, and even the queen-mother had to turn away her head. the drones looked as solemn as possible. it would not do for them to laugh at their brother. they did not want him to laugh at them when they made excuses for staying at home. they even pretended not to hear one of the workers when she said that it was funny how some people couldn't use their wings if one of their feet hurt them.
"yes," said another worker, "and it is funny, too, how some people can get along very well on three legs when they have to, while others are too helpless to do anything unless they can use the whole six."
the drones began to talk together. "i think that the whole swarm should fly at the kingbird and sting him and drive him away," said one. "there is no sense in allowing him to perch outside our home and catch us as we pass in and out. i say that we should make war upon him!" he looked very fierce as he spoke, buzzing and twitching his feelers at every step.
"exactly!" cried another drone. "if i had a sting, i would lead the attack. as it is, i may be useful in guarding the comb. it is a great pity that drones have no stings." you would have thought, to hear him speak, that if he had been given a sting like those of the workers, not all the bees in the tree could keep him from fighting.
while the drones were talking about war, some of the workers sent to their queen for advice. "tell us," they said, "how to drive away the kingbird. should we try to sting him? you know it kills a bee to sting anybody, and we don't want to if we can help it, yet we will if you say so."
the queen-mother shook her head. "you must not bother me about such things," she said. "i have all that i can do to get the eggs ready, and you must look after the swarm. nobody else can do my work, and i have no time to do yours." as she spoke, she finished the one hundred and seventeenth egg of that day's lot, and before night came she would probably have laid more than a thousand, so you can see she was quite right when she said she had no time for other things.
this left the workers to plan for themselves, and they agreed that a number of them should fly out together and see where the kingbird was.
then they could decide about attacking him later. when one gave the signal, they dashed out as nearly together as possible.
after the workers returned with honey and pollen, the drones crowded around them, asking questions. "where is he? what does he look like? did he try to catch you?" the workers would not answer them, and said: "go and find out for yourself. we all came back alive." then they went about their work as usual.
"i don't see how they dared to go," said a very young bee who was just out of her cocoon and was still too weak to fly.
"pooh!" said the big drone. "you wouldn't see me hanging around this tree if i were not lame."
"there is no use in stopping work even if you are scared," said one of the workers. she smiled as she spoke, and whispered something to the queen-mother as she passed her. the queen-mother smiled also.
"why don't you drones go for honey?" she said. "you must be getting very hungry."
"we don't feel very well," they answered. "perhaps it would be better for our health if we were to keep quiet for a while and save our strength. we will lunch off some of the honey in the comb if we need food."
"not a bit of it!" exclaimed the workers. "stay in the tree if you want to for your health, but don't you dare touch the honey we have gathered for winter, when the day is clear and bright like this." and whenever a drone tried to get food from the comb they drove him away.
the poor drones had a hard day of it, and at night they were so hungry they could hardly sleep. the next morning they peeped out, and then rushed away to the flowers for their breakfast. they stayed out all day, and when they returned at night they rushed swiftly into the tree again.
"there!" they said; "we escaped the kingbird."
"what kingbird?" asked a worker.
"the one who was there yesterday," answered the drones. "has he been back to-day?"
"there was no kingbird near the tree yesterday," said the worker.
"what!" cried the drones.
"no," said the queen-mother, "i was mistaken when i thought i heard him.
the workers told me after they had been out for honey. perhaps they forgot to tell you."
but her eyes twinkled as she spoke, and all the workers smiled, and for some reason the drones did not know what to say.
the story of the cow bird's egg
on the edge of the forest next to the meadow, a pair of young goldfinches were about to begin housekeeping. they were a handsome couple, and the birds who were already nesting near by were much pleased to see them tree-hunting there.
mr. goldfinch was a fine, cheerful little fellow, every feather of whose black and yellow coat was always well oiled and lying in its proper place. his wife was dressed in a dull, greenish brown with a touch of yellow on her breast. "bright yellow and black does very well for mr.
goldfinch," she would say, "but for one who has to sit on the nest as long as i shall have to, it would never do. people would see me among the leaves and know just where to find my eggs."
mr. goldfinch thought that there was never a bird who had a prettier, dearer, or harder-working little wife than he, and he would wonder how he was ever happy before he knew her. that is a way that people have of forgetting the days that are past; and the truth is that mr. goldfinch had made fun of the robins and other birds all spring, because they had to build nests and hunt worms for their babies, while he had nothing to do but sing and sleep and feed himself. in those days the robins used to call after him as he flew away, "silly fellow! silly fellow! silly!"
they knew that there is something sweeter in life than just taking good care of one's self.
one afternoon mr. goldfinch saw a tiny green-brown bird on a sweetbriar bush, and as he watched her he thought her the most beautiful creature he had ever seen. she had such a dainty way of picking out the seeds, and gave such graceful hops from one twig to another. then mr. goldfinch fluffed up his feathers and swelled out his throat and sang her such songs as he had never sung before. he did not want her to speak to anybody else, and yet he could not help her doing so, for goldfinches always go together in crowds until they have homes of their own, and at this time they were having concerts every morning. he showed her where the finest dandelion seeds could be found, and one bright and sunshiny day she became mrs. goldfinch, and they went together to find a place for their home.
they began one nest and had it nearly done, when mr. goldfinch said it was not in a good place, and tore it all to pieces. mrs. goldfinch felt very badly about this and talked it over with some of her goldfinch neighbors. they told her not to mind it at all, that their husbands often did the same thing, and that sometimes they came to like the new place much better than the old. at any rate, there was no use in getting cross about it, because that was something she would have to expect.
mr. goldfinch was sure that they had built too near the ground, and he had chosen a crotch above. toward this he was dragging the bits of grape-vine and cedar-bark which were woven into their first nest. he said they could also use some of the grasses and mosses which they had gotten together, and he even told his wife of some fine thistle-down which he could bring for the inside, where the eggs were to be laid.
mrs. goldfinch watched him tugging with bill and both feet to loosen the bits of bark, and she said to herself: "dear fellow! what a helper he is! i won't mind rebuilding if it makes him happy," and she went to work with a will.
when the sun went down in the west the next night the second nest was done, and it was the last thing at which the goldfinches looked before tucking their heads under their wings and going to sleep. it was the first thing that they saw the next morning, too, and they hopped all around it and twittered with pride, and gave it little tweaks here and little pokes there before they flew away to get breakfast.
while they were gone, mrs. cowbird came walking over the grass and dry leaves to the foot of the tree. she wagged her head at every step, and put on as many airs as though she were showily dressed, instead of wearing, as she always does, a robe of dull brownish gray. she had seen the goldfinches fly away, and she was looking for their home. she was a lazy creature in spite of her stirring ways, and she wished to find a nice little nest in which to lay an egg. you know cowbirds never think of building nests. they want all of their time to take care of themselves, which is a very foolish way of living; but then, you could never make a cowbird think so!
"that nest is exactly right," said mrs. cowbird. "i will lay my egg there at once, and when mrs. goldfinch has laid hers she will have to hatch them all together and take care of my baby for me. what an easy way this is to bring up one's family! it is really no work at all! and i am sure that my children will get along well, because i am always careful to choose the nests of small birds for them. then they are larger and stronger than the other babies, and can get more than their share of food."
so she laid a big white egg with gray and brown spots on it in the goldfinches' new home, and then she flew off to the cowbird flock, as gay and careless as you please. when the goldfinches came back, they saw the egg in their nest and called all their neighbors to talk it over.
"what shall i ever do?" said mrs. goldfinch. "i wanted my nest for my own eggs, and i meant to lay them to-morrow. i suppose i shall have to sit on this one too, but it won't be at all comfortable."
"i wouldn't," said one of her neighbors, a yellow warbler. "i left my nest once when such a thing happened to me, and built a new one for my own eggs."
"oh dear!" cried mrs. goldfinch, "we have built two already, and i cannot build another."
"well, whatever you do," said a vireo, "don't hatch the big egg out with your own. i did once, and such a time as i had! the young cowbird pushed two of my little vireos out onto the ground, and ate so much that i was quite worn out by the work of hunting for him."
"my dear," said mr. goldfinch, "i have an excellent plan. we will put another floor in our nest, right over this egg, and then by adding a bit all around the sides we can have plenty of room for our own children. it will be much less work than beginning all over again, and then the cowbird's egg will be too cool to hatch."
everybody called this a most clever plan, and mr. goldfinch was very proud to have thought of it. they went to work once more, and it was not so very long before the new floor was done and the new walls raised.
then, oh, wonder of wonders! there were soon four tiny, pearly eggs of their own lying on the thistle-down lining of the nest.
mrs. goldfinch had to stay very closely at home now, but her husband went off with his friends a great deal. he bathed and sang and preened his feathers and talked about his queer nest and his bright little wife, after the manner of goldfinches everywhere.
his friends laughed at him for helping so much about the nest, for, you know, goldfinches do not often help their wives about home. he cocked his handsome head on one side and answered: "my wife seemed to need me then. she is not so very strong. and i do not know what she would ever have done about the strange egg, if i had not been there to advise her."
when he got back to his home that night, mrs. goldfinch said: "i have been wondering why we did not roll the cowbird's egg out on the ground, instead of going to all that trouble of building around it."
and mr. goldfinch declared that he believed she was the only bird who had ever thought of such a thing. "it could have been done just as well as not," he said. "i must tell that to the other birds in the morning.
how lucky i am to have such a bright wife! it would be dreadful if such a clever fellow as i had a dull mate!"
mrs. mourning dove's housekeeping
strange as it may seem, there had never been any mourning doves in the forest until this year, and when a pair came there to live, the people were much excited. they talked about the doves' song, so sweet and sad, and about their soft coats of brown and gray, and they wondered very much what kind of home they would build. would it be a swinging pocket of hairs, strings, and down, like that of the orioles? would it be stout and heavy like the nests of the robins? or would it be a ball of leaves and grasses on the ground, with a tiny doorway in one side, like that of the ovenbird?
you can see that the forest people were really very much interested in the mourning doves, and so, perhaps, it is not strange that, when the new couple built their nest in the lower branches of a spruce tree, everybody watched it and talked about it.
"really," said one of the blackbirds, who had flown over from the swamp near by, "i never should think of calling that thing a nest! it is nothing but a few twigs and sticks laid together. it is just as flat as a maple-leaf, and what is to keep those poor little doves from tumbling to the ground i can't see."
"i wouldn't worry about the little doves yet," said a warbler. "i don't think there will ever be any little doves in that nest. the eggs will roll off of it long before they are ready to hatch, and the nest will blow to pieces in the first storm we have."
"well," said the blackbird, as she started for home, "i shall want to know how the mourning doves get on. if any of you are over my way, stop and tell me the news."
some days after this, a quail, passing under the doves' home, happened to look up and see two white eggs in the nest. it was so very thin that she could see them quite plainly through the openings between the twigs.
later in the day, she spoke of this to a grouse, saying, "i came by the mourning doves' nest and saw two white eggs through the bottom."
after she went away, the grouse said to a wild rabbit: "the quail told me that the mourning dove's eggs went right through the bottom of her nest, and i don't wonder. it wasn't strong enough to hold anything."
at sunset, the rabbit had a short visit with mrs. goldfinch, as she pulled a great thistle-head to pieces and made her supper from its seeds. he told her he had heard that the mourning dove's eggs had fallen through the bottom of the nest and broken on the ground, and mrs.
goldfinch said: "oh, that poor mrs. mourning dove! i must go to see her in the morning." then she fled home to her own four pearly treasures.
now, of course the rabbit was mistaken when he said anybody had told him that those two eggs were broken; just as much mistaken as the grouse was when she said somebody had told her that the eggs had fallen. they both thought they were right, but they were careless listeners and careless talkers, and so each one had changed it a bit in the telling.
the next day it rained, and the next, and the next. mrs. goldfinch did not dare leave her nest to make calls, lest the cold raindrops should chill and hurt the four tiny birds that lay curled up in their shells.
at last the weather was warm and sunshiny, and mrs. goldfinch and some of her bird neighbors went to call on mrs. mourning dove. they found her just coming from a wheat-field, where she had been to get grain. "oh, you poor creature!" they cried. "we have heard all about it. your poor babies! how sorry we are for you!"
mrs. mourning dove looked from one to another as though she did not know what to make of it. "what do you mean?" she cooed. "my babies are well and doing finely. won't you come to see them?"
then it was the turn of the other birds to be surprised. "why," they chirped, "we heard that your eggs had fallen through your nest and had broken and killed the tiny dove babies inside. is it true?"
"not a word of it," answered mrs. mourning dove. "the nest is all right, and the eggs were not broken until my two little darlings broke them with their sharp beaks."
"here they are," she added, fondly. "did you ever see such pretty ones?
see him open his bill, the dear! and did you ever see such a neck as she has? mr. mourning dove thinks there never were such children."
"but do you feel perfectly safe to leave them in that nest?" asked the oriole politely. "my babies are so restless that i should be afraid to trust them in it."
"that is what people always say," answered mrs. mourning dove, with a happy coo, "and i fear that i am a rather poor housekeeper, but it runs in our family. mr. mourning dove and i have raised many pairs of children, and they never rolled out, or tumbled through, or blew away, and i do not worry about these. i shall never be thrifty like you good builders, perhaps, but i'm sure you cannot love your little ones any more than i do mine. it was very kind of you to be so sorry for me when you heard i was in trouble. i think i have the best neighbors in the world."
when her callers went away, they could not say enough about mrs.
mourning dove's pleasant ways, and her gentle, well-behaved children.
"it is too bad she is such a poor nest-maker," the vireo said, "and i understand now what she meant when she told me that they sometimes used old robins' nests for their young. she said they flattened them out and added a few twigs, and that they did finely. i thought it very queer in them to do so, but perhaps if i had not been a good builder i should have done the same thing."
"perhaps we all would," the others agreed. "she certainly is a very pleasant bird, and she is bringing up her children well. mr. mourning dove seems to think her perfect. we won't worry any more about her."
the young blue jay who was not brave enough to be afraid
everybody who is acquainted with the blue jays knows that they are a very brave family. that is the best thing that you can say about them.
to be sure, they dress very handsomely, and there is no prettier sight, on a fine winter morning, than a flock of blue jays flitting from branch to branch, dining off the acorns on the oak trees, and cocking their crested heads on one side as they look over the country. they are great talkers then, and are always telling each other just what to do; yet none of them ever do what they are told to, so they might just as well stop giving advice.
the other people of the forest do not like the blue jays at all, and if one of them gets into trouble they will not help him out. this always has been so, and it always will be so. if it could be winter all the time, the blue jays could be liked well enough, for in cold weather they eat seeds and nuts and do not quarrel so much with others. it is in the summer that they become bad neighbors. then they live in the thickest part of the woods and raise families of tiny, fuzzy babies in their great coarse nests. it is then, too, that they change their beautiful coats, and while the old feathers are dropping off and the new ones are growing they are not at all pretty. oh, then is the time to beware of the blue jays!
they do very little talking during the summer, and the forest people do not know when they are coming, unless they see a flutter of blue wings among the branches. the blue jays have a reason for keeping still then.
they are doing sly things, and they do not want to be found out.
the wee babies grow fast and their mouths are always open for more food.
father and mother blue jay spend all their time in marketing, and they are not content with seeds and berries. they visit the nests of their bird neighbors, and then something very sad happens. when the blue jays go to a nest there may be four eggs in it; but when they go away there will not be any left, nothing but pieces of broken egg-shell. it is very, very sad, but this is another of the things which will always be so, and all that the other birds can do is to watch and drive the jays away.
there was once a young blue jay in the forest who was larger than his brothers and sisters, and kept crowding them toward the edge of the nest. when their father came with a bit of food for them, he would stretch his legs and flutter his wings and reach up for the first bite.
and because he was the largest and the strongest, he usually got it.
sometimes, too, the first bite was so big that there was nothing left for anyone else to bite at. he was a very greedy fellow, and he had no right to take more than his share, just because he happened to be the first of the family to break open the shell, or because he grew fast.
this same young blue jay used to brag about what he would do when he got out of the nest, and his mother told him that he would get into trouble if he were not careful. she said that even blue jays had to look out for danger.
"huh!" said the young blue jay; "who's afraid?"
"now you talk like a bully," said mother blue jay, "for people who are really brave are always willing to be careful."
but the young blue jay only crowded his brothers and sisters more than usual, and thought, inside his foolish little pin-feathery head, that when he got a chance, he'd show them what courage was.
after a while his chance came. all the small birds had learned to flutter from branch to branch, and to hop quite briskly over the ground.
one afternoon they went to a part of the forest where the ground was damp and all was strange. the father and mother told their children to keep close together and they would take care of them; but the foolish young blue jay wanted a chance to go alone, so he hid behind a tree until the others were far ahead, and then he started off another way. it was great fun for a time, and when the feathered folk looked down at him he raised his crest higher than ever and thought how he would scare them when he was a little older.
the young blue jay was just thinking about this when he saw something long and shining lying in the pathway ahead. he remembered what his father had said about snakes, and about one kind that wore rattles on their tails. he wondered if this one had a rattle, and he made up his mind to see how it was fastened on. "i am a blue jay," he said to himself, "and i was never yet afraid of anything."
the rattlesnake, for it was he, raised his head to look at the bird. the young blue jay saw that his eyes were very bright. he looked right into them, and could see little pictures of himself upon their shining surfaces. he stood still to look, and the rattlesnake came nearer. then the young blue jay tried to see his tail, but he couldn't look away from the rattlesnake's eyes, though he tried ever so hard.
the rattlesnake now coiled up his body, flattened out his head, and showed his teeth, while all the time his queer forked tongue ran in and out of his mouth. then the young blue jay tried to move and found that he couldn't. all he could do was to stand there and watch those glowing eyes and listen to the song which the rattlesnake began to sing:
"through grass and fern, with many a turn, my shining body i draw.
in woodland shade my home is made, for this is the forest law.
"whoever tries to look in my eyes comes near to my poisoned jaw; and birds o'erbold i charm and hold, for this is the forest law."
the rattlesnake drew nearer and nearer, and the young blue jay was shaking with fright, when there was a rustle of wings, and his father and mother flew down and around the rattlesnake, screaming loudly to all the other jays, and making the snake turn away from the helpless little bird he had been about to strike. it was a long time before the forest was quiet again, and when it was, the blue jay family were safely in their nest, and the rattlesnake had gone home without his supper.
after the young blue jay got over his fright, he began to complain because he had not seen the rattlesnake's tail. then, indeed, his patient mother gave him such a scolding as he had never had in all his life, and his father said that he deserved a sound pecking for his foolishness.
when the young blue jay showed that he was sorry for all the trouble that he had made, his parents let him have some supper and go to bed; but not until he had learned two sayings which he was always to remember. and these were the sayings: "a really brave bird dares to be afraid of some things," and, "if you go near enough to see the tail of a danger, you may be struck by its head."
the red squirrels begin housekeeping
the first thing that mr. red squirrel did after coming to the forest and meeting the gray squirrel was to look for something to eat. it was not a good season for a stranger who had no hidden store of nuts and seeds to draw upon. the apples and corn were not ripe, and last year's seeds and acorns were nearly gone. what few remained here and there had lost their sweet and wholesome taste. poor mr. red squirrel began to wish that he had eaten breakfast before he ran away. he even went to the edge of the forest and looked over toward the farmhouse, where his open cage hung in the sunshine. he knew that there were nuts and a fresh bit of fruit inside of it, and his mouth watered at the thought of them, but he was a sensible young fellow, and he knew that if he went back to eat, the cage door would be snapped shut, and he would never again be free to scamper in the beautiful trees.
"i will starve first!" he said to himself, and he was so much in earnest that he spoke quite loudly.
the words were hardly out of his mouth when "pft!" a fat acorn came down at his feet. he caught it up with his forepaws before looking around. it was smooth and glossy, not at all as though it had passed a long winter on an oak branch. he took a good nibble at it and then looked up to see if there were more on the tree above him. you can think how surprised he was to find himself sitting beneath a maple, for in all the years since the world began no maple has ever borne acorns.
"there are no more to come," he said. "i must take small bites and make it last as long as i can." and he turned it around and around, clutching it tightly with his long, crooked claws, so that not the tiniest bit could be lost. at last it was all eaten, not a crumb was left, and then "pft!" down came a walnut. this hit him squarely on the back, but he was too hungry to mind, and he ate it all, just stopping long enough to say:
"if this maple bears such fruit as acorns and walnuts, i should like to live in a maple grove."
next came a hazelnut, then a butternut, and last of all a fat kernel of yellow corn. he knew now that some friend was hidden in the branches above, so he tucked the corn in one of his cheek-pockets, and scampered up the maple trunk to find out who it was. he saw a whisking reddish-brown tail, and knew that some other red squirrel was there. but whoever it was did not mean to be caught, and such a chase as he had!
just as he thought he had overtaken his unknown friend, he could see nothing more of her, and he was almost vexed to think how careless he must have been to miss her. he ran up and down the tree on which he last saw her, and found a little hollow in one of its large branches. he looked in, and there she was, the same dainty creature whom he had so often watched from his cage. he could see that she was breathless from running so fast, yet she pretended to be surprised at seeing him.
perhaps she now thought that she had been too bold in giving him food, and so wanted him to think that it had been somebody else.
"good morning!" said he. "thank you very much for your kindness."
"what do you mean?" said she.
"as though you didn't know!" he answered. "i never heard of a maple tree that bore acorns, nuts, and corn, and that in the springtime."
"oh, well," said she, tossing her pretty head, "you have lived in a cage and may not know what our forest trees can do."
that was a rather saucy thing to say, but mr. red squirrel knew her kind heart and that she said it only in mischief. "how do you know i have lived in a cage?" he asked.
"i i thought you looked like the squirrel at the farmhouse," she said; and then forgetting herself, she added, "you did look so surprised when that walnut hit you."
"where were you then?" he asked quickly.
"oh! i was on a branch above you," she answered, seeing that he now knew all about it. "you looked so hungry, and i had plenty of food stored away. you may have some whenever you wish. it must have been dreadful in that cage."
now mr. red squirrel had loved his little friend ever since the first time he saw her on the rail fence, but he had never thought she would care for him a tired, discouraged fellow, who had passed such a sorrowful life in prison. yet when he heard her pitying words, and saw the light in her tender eyes, he wondered if he could win her for his wife.
"i shall never be able to do anything for you," said he. "you are young and beautiful and know the forest ways. i am a stranger and saddened by my hard life. i wish i could help you."
"the blue jays! the blue jays!" she cried, starting up. "they have found my hidden acorns and are eating them."
and sure enough, a pair of those handsome robbers were pulling acorn after acorn out of a tree-hollow near by, and eating them as fast as they could. you should have seen mr. red squirrel then! he leaped from branch to branch until he reached the blue jays; then he stood by the hole where the acorns were stored, and scolded them.
"chickaree-chickaree-quilch-quilch-chickaree-chickaree!" he said; and that in the red squirrel language is a very severe scolding. he jumped about with his head down and his tail jerking, while his eyes gleamed like coals of fire. the blue jays made a great fuss and called "jay!
jay!" at him, and made fun of him for being a stranger, but they left at last, and mr. red squirrel turned to his friend.
"what would i have done without your help?" she said. "i was so dreadfully frightened. don't you see how my paws are shaking still?" and she held out the prettiest little paws imaginable for him to see.
then mr. red squirrel's heart began to thump very fast and hard beneath the white fur of his chest, and he sighed softly. "i wish i might always help you and protect you," he said; "but i suppose there are better fellows than i who want to do that." and he sighed again.
"yes, they might want to," she said, looking away from him and acting as though she saw another blue jay coming.
"you wouldn't be my little wife, would you?" he asked, coming nearer to her.
"why i might!" she answered, with a saucy flirt of her tail, and she scampered away as fast as she could. do you think mr. red squirrel stopped then to eat his fat kernel of yellow corn? or do you think he waited to see whether the blue jays were around? no, indeed! he followed as fast as his legs could carry him from tree to tree, from branch to branch, and it was not until he had reached the top of a tall beech that he overtook his little sweetheart. they were still there when the gray squirrel happened along in the afternoon.
"ah!" said he, squinting at mr. red squirrel, for his eyes were poor.
"you are getting acquainted, are you? pleasant society here. the squirrel set is very select. you must meet some of our young people.
suppose you will begin housekeeping one of these days?"
"i have done so already, sir," answered mr. red squirrel, although his wife was nudging him with one paw and motioning him to keep quiet. "mrs.
red squirrel and i will build our round home in the top fork of this tree. we shall be pleased to have you call when we are settled."
"is that so?" exclaimed the gray squirrel. "i did not know that you were married. i thought you came alone to the forest."
"this is my wife, sir," said mr. red squirrel, and the gray squirrel made his very best bow and looked at her as sharply as his poor eyes would let him.
"i think i must have seen you somewhere," he said; "your face is very familiar." and he scratched his poor old puzzled head with one claw.
"why, cousin gray squirrel, don't you know bushy-tail?" she cried. "you lived the next tree to mine all winter."
"to be sure!" he exclaimed. "but isn't your marriage rather sudden?"
"no," she said, blushing under her fur. "we have always liked each other, although we never spoke until this morning. i used to scamper along the rail fence to see mr. red squirrel in his cage."
"did you truly come for that?" asked her husband, after their caller had gone.
"i truly did," she answered, "but i never expected anybody to know it.
you poor fellow! i felt so sorry for you. i would have given every nut i had to set you free."
they were a very happy couple, and the next fall the gray squirrel watched them and their children gathering nuts for their winter stores.
mr. red squirrel, as the head of the family, planned the work, yet each did his share. the nuts were not yet ripe, and they gnawed off the stems, then came to the ground, filled their cheek-pockets with the fallen nuts, and scampered off to hide them in many places. they were stored in tree-hollows, under the rustling leaves which strewed the ground, in the cracks of old logs, beneath brush-heaps, and in holes in the ground.
"don't stop to think how many you need," said the little mother to her children. "get every nut you can. it may be a very long winter."
"and if you don't eat them all," said their hard-working father with a twinkle in his eyes, "you may want to drop a few down to some poor fellow who has none. that was your mother's way."
"when was it her way? what makes you smile when you say it? mother, what does he mean?" cried the young red squirrels all in a breath.
"i gave some nuts to a hungry squirrel once," she said, "and he was so grateful that he drove the blue jays away when they tried to rob me."
but she looked so happy as she spoke that the children knew there was more to the story. they dared not tease her to tell, so they whispered among themselves and wondered what their father meant.
as they gathered nuts near the gray squirrel, he motioned them to come close. "s-sh!" said he. "don't tell it from me, but i think the poor hungry fellow was your father, and it was a lucky thing for you that she had enough to give away."
"do you suppose that was it?" the young red squirrels whispered to each other. "do you really suppose so?"
the biggest little rabbit learns to see
seven little rabbits lay on their nest at the bottom of the burrow, and wriggled and squirmed and pushed their soft noses against each other all day long. life was very easy for them, and they were contented. the first thing that they remembered was lying on their bed of fur, hay, and dried leaves, and feeling a great, warm, soft something close beside them. after a while they learned that this something was their mamma rabbit. it was she who had gotten the nest ready for them and lined it with fur that she tore from her own breast. she didn't care so much about looking beautiful as she did about making her babies comfortable.
it was their mamma rabbit, too, who fed them with warm milk from her own body until they should be old enough to go out of the burrow. then they would nibble bark and tender young shoots from the roots of the trees, and all the fresh, green, growing things that rabbits like. she used to tell them about this food, and they wondered and wondered how it would taste. they began to feel very big and strong now. the soft fur was growing on their naked little bodies and covering even the soles of their feet. it was growing inside their cheeks, too, and that made them feel important, for papa rabbit said that he did not know any other animals that had fur inside their cheeks. he said it was something to be very proud of, so they were very proud, although why one should want fur inside of one's cheeks it would be hard to say.
what tangles they did get into! each little rabbit had four legs, two short ones in front, and two long ones behind to help him take long jumps from one place to another. so, you see, there were twenty-eight legs there, pushing, catching in the hay, kicking, and sometimes just waving in the air when their tiny owners chanced to roll over on their backs and couldn't get right side up again. then mamma rabbit would come and poke them this way and that, never hurting any of them, but getting the nest in order.
"it is a great deal of work to pick up after children," she would say with a tired little sigh, "but it will not be long before they have homes of their own and are doing the same thing."
mamma rabbit was quite right when she said that, for all of their people set up housekeeping when very young, and then the cares of life begin.
one fine morning when the children were alone in their burrow, the biggest little rabbit had a queer feeling in his face, below and in front of his long ears, and above his eager little nose. it almost scared him at first, for he had never before felt anything at all like it. then he guessed what it meant. there were two bunchy places on his face, that mamma rabbit had told him were eyes. "when you are older,"
she had said to him, "these eyes will open, and then you will see." for the rabbit children are always blind when they are babies.
when his mother told him that, the biggest little rabbit had said, "what do you mean when you say i shall 'see'? is it anything like eating?"
and mamma rabbit said, "no, you cannot taste things until you touch them, but you can see them when they are far away."
"then it is like smelling," said the biggest little rabbit.
"no, it is not like smelling, either, for there are many things, like stones, which one cannot smell and yet can see."
"then it surely is like hearing," said the biggest little rabbit.
"oh dear!" exclaimed his mother, who was tired of having questions asked which could not be answered. "it is not a bit like hearing. you could never hear a black cloud coming across the sky, but you could see it if you were outside your burrow. nobody can make you understand what seeing is until your eyes are open, and then you will find out for yourself without asking."
this made the biggest little rabbit lie still for a while, and then he said: "what is a black cloud, and why does it come across the sky? and what is the sky, and why does it let the cloud come? and what is " but he did not get any answer, for his mother ran out of the burrow as fast as she could.
and now his eyes were surely opening and he should see! his tiny heart thumped hard with excitement, and he rubbed his face with his forepaws to make his eyes open faster. ah! there it was; something round and bright at the other end of the burrow, and some queer, slender things were waving across it. he wondered if it were good to eat, but he dared not crawl toward it to see. he did not know that the round, bright thing was just a bit of sky which he saw through the end of the burrow, and that the slender, waving ones were the branches of a dead tree tossing in the wind. then he looked at his brothers and sisters as they lay beside him. he would not have known what they were if he had not felt of them at the same time.
"i can see!" he cried. "i can see everything that there is to see! i'm ahead of you! don't you wish that you could see, too?"
that was not a very kind thing to say, but in a minute more his brothers and sisters had reason to be glad that they couldn't see. even while he was speaking and looking toward the light, he saw a brown head with two round eyes look in at him, and then a great creature that he thought must surely be a dog ran in toward him. how frightened he was then! he pushed his nose in among his blind brothers and sisters and tried to hide himself among them. he thought something dreadful was about to happen.
"i wish mamma rabbit would come," he squeaked, shutting his eyes as closely as he could. "i wish mamma rabbit would come."
"why, here i am," she answered. "what are you afraid of?"
the biggest little rabbit opened his eyes, and there was the creature who had frightened him so, and it was his own mother! you can imagine how glad she was to see that one of her children had his eyes open.
"i will call in some of my rabbit friends," she said, "and let you see them, if you will promise not to be afraid."
the next day four of the other little rabbits had their eyes open, and the day after that they all could see each other and the shining piece of sky at the end of the burrow. it was not so very long afterward that the rabbit family went out to dine in the forest, and this was the first time that the children had seen their father. often when their mother left them alone in the burrow she had pulled grass and leaves over the opening to hide it from him, for rabbit fathers do not love their children until they are old enough to go out into the great world, and it would never do for them to know where their babies are kept. then their father taught them how to gnaw tough bark to wear their teeth down, for rabbits' teeth grow all the time, and if they were to eat only soft food, their teeth would get too long. he taught them, too, how to move their ears in the right way for keen hearing, and told them that when chased they must run for the burrow or the nearest thicket. "then crouch down on some leaves that are the color of your fur," he said, "and you may not be seen at all."
"why should we run?" said the biggest little rabbit.
"because you might be caught if you didn't."
"what might catch us?" asked the biggest little rabbit.
"oh, a hawk, perhaps, or a weasel."
"what does a hawk look like?"
"like a great bird floating in the sky," said papa rabbit. "now, don't ask me a single question more."
"does a hawk look like that bird above us?" asked the biggest little rabbit.
his father gave one look upward. "yes!" he said. "run!"
and just as the hawk swooped down toward the ground, he saw nine white-tipped tails disappear into a burrow near by.
the little bat who wouldn't go to bed
"come," said mamma bat, flying toward her home in the cave, "it is time that you children went to bed. the eastern sky is growing bright, and i can see the fleecy clouds blush rosy red as the sun looks at them."
the little bats flitted along after her, and papa bat came behind them.
they had been flying through the starlit forest all night, chasing the many small insects that come out after the sun has gone down, and passing in and out of the tangled branches without ever touching one.
indeed, mamma bat would have been ashamed if children of hers flew against anything in the dark. there might be some excuse for such a mistake in the daytime, for bats' eyes do not see well then, but in the night-time! she would have scolded them well, and they would have deserved it, for bats have the most wonderful way of feeling things before they touch them, and there are no other people in the forest who can do that. there are no other people who can tell by the feeling of the air when something is near, and the bats made much fun of their friend, the screech owl, once, when he flew against a tree and fell to the ground.
and now the night was over and their mother had called them to go home.
one of the little bats hung back with a very cross look on his face, and twice his father had to tell him to fly faster. he was thinking how he would like to see the forest in the daytime. he had never seen the sun rise, and he wanted to do that. he had never seen any of the day-birds or the animals that awaken in the morning. he thought it was pretty mean to make poor little bats go off to bed the minute the stars began to fade. he didn't believe what his father and mother said, that he wouldn't have a good time if he did stay up. he had coaxed and coaxed and teased and teased, but it hadn't made a bit of difference. every morning he had to fold his wings and go to sleep in a dark crack in the rock of the cave, hanging, head downward, close to the rest of the family. their father said that there never was a better place to sleep than in this same crack, and it certainly was easy to catch on with the hooks at the lower ends of their wings when they hung themselves up for the day. but now he just wouldn't go to bed, so there!
"it is your turn next," said mamma bat to him, when the rest of the children had hung themselves up.
"i'm not going to bed," the little bat answered.
"not going to bed!" said his father. "are you crazy?"
"no," said the little bat, "i'm not."
"i don't believe the child is well," said mamma bat. "he never acted like this before. i'm afraid he has overeaten." and she looked very anxious.
"i am well, and i haven't eaten too much," said the little bat. "i think you might let a fellow have some fun once in a while. i've never seen the sun in my life, and there are whole lots of birds and animals in the forest that i've only heard about."
papa and mamma bat looked at each other without speaking.
"i won't go to bed!" said the little bat.
"very well," said his father. "i shall not try to make you. fly away at once and let us go to sleep."
after he had gone, mamma bat said, "i suppose you did right to let him go, but it seems too bad that children have to find out for themselves the trouble that comes from disobedience."
the little bat flew away feeling very brave. he guessed he knew how to take care of himself, even in daylight. he felt sorry for his brothers who were in the cave, but he made up his mind that he would tell them all about it the next night.
the eastern sky grew brighter and brighter. it hurt his eyes to look at it, and he blinked and turned away. then the song-birds awakened and began to sing. it was very interesting, but he thought they sang too loudly. the forest at night is a quiet place, and he didn't see the sense of shouting so, even if the sun were coming up. the night-birds never made such a fuss over the moon, and he guessed the moon was as good as the sun.
somebody went scampering over the grass, kicking up his heels as he ran.
"that must be a rabbit," thought the little bat. "the screech owl told me that rabbits run in that way. i wish i could see him more plainly. i don't know what is the matter with my eyes."
just then a sunbeam came slanting through the forest and fell on his furry coat as he clung to a branch. "ow!" he cried. "ow! how warm it is!
i don't like that. the moonbeams do not feel so. i must fly to a shady corner." he started to fly. just what was the matter, he never knew. it may have been because he couldn't see well, it may have been because he was getting very tired, or it may have been because the strangeness of it all was beginning to frighten him; but at all events, he went down, down, down until he found himself pitching and tumbling around in the grass.
a crow had seen him fall, and cried loudly, "come! come! come!" to his friends. the rabbits, who were feeding near by, came scampering along, making great leaps in their haste to see what was the matter. the goldfinches, the robins, the orioles, the woodpeckers, and many other birds came fluttering up. even a blue jay sat on a branch above the bat and shrieked, "jay! jay! jay!" to add to the excitement. and last of all, the ground hog appeared, coming slowly and with dignity, as a person who can remember his grandfather should do.
"what is the cause of all this commotion?" he asked. he might have said, "what is the matter?" and then they would have understood him at once, but he was too haughty for that. he thought he had to use big words once in a while to show that he could. if people didn't understand them, he was willing to explain what he meant.
"we've found such a queer bird, sir," said the biggest little rabbit, without waiting to find out what a "commotion" was. "just see him tumble around!"
"bird? that is no bird," said a woodpecker. "look at his ears and his nose. he hasn't even a bill."
"well, he flies," said the biggest little rabbit, "because i saw him, so he must be a bird."
"humph!" said a chipmunk. "so does my cousin, the flying squirrel, in a way, yet he is no more bird than i am."
"and this fellow hasn't a feather to his skin!" cried an oriole.
"i don't say that my son is right," said papa rabbit, "but this creature has wings." and he gave the bat a poke that made him flutter wildly for a minute.
"yes, but what kind of wings?" asked the goldfinch. "a pair of skinny things that grow on to his legs and have hooks on both ends."
"he must be a very stupid fellow, at all events," said the ground hog.
"he doesn't talk, or walk, or eat, or even fly well. he must come of a very common family. for my part, i am not interested in persons of that kind." and he walked away with his nose in the air.
now the other forest people would have liked to watch the bat longer, but after the ground hog had gone off in this way, they thought it would show too much curiosity if they stayed. so one after another went away, and the little bat was left alone. he fluttered around until he reached the branch where the blue jay had been, and there he hung himself up to wait until night.
"oh dear!" he said, "i wonder how long a day is. i am hot and blind and sleepy, and if any more of the forest people come and talk about me, i don't know what i shall do. they don't think me good-looking because my wings grow to my legs. i only wish i could see what they look like. i believe they are just as homely."
and then, because he was a very tired little bat, and cross, as people always are when they have done wrong, he began to blame somebody else for all his trouble.
"if my father and mother had cared very much about me," he said, "they would never have let me stay up all day. guess if i were a big bat and had little bats of my own, i'd take better care of them!" but that is always the way, and when, long afterward, he was a big bat with little bats of his own, he was a much wiser person.
a swarm leaves the bee tree
the old bee tree was becoming very crowded and the queen-mother grew restless. there were many things to make her so. in the tree were thousands of cells made ready for her eggs, and she had been busy for days putting one in each. in the larger cells she laid eggs that would hatch out drones, and in the smaller ones she laid worker eggs. she never laid any queen eggs. perhaps she did not want any queens among her children, for there can never be two queens in one swarm, and when a new one is hatched, the queen-mother has to go away and find another home.
that is a law among the bees.
the workers, however, knew that there must be young queens growing up all the time. supposing something should happen to the queen-mother, what would become of the swarm if there were nobody to lay eggs? so after she had laid several thousand worker eggs, and it was time for the young ones to hatch, they decided to change some of the babies into young queens. and this was easy enough. when they were out for honey, they filled the pockets on their hind legs with pollen, the yellow dust that is found in flowers. this was to be mixed with honey and water and made into bread for the babies, who were now awake, and looked like tiny white worms in the bottom of their cells. then they made some that was almost like sour jelly, and put it in a few of the worker cells for the tiny white worms, or larvæ, to eat. the larvæ that eat this jelly grow up to be queens, and can lay eggs. those that eat the common bread are either drones or workers, whichever their mother had planned them to be.
after the larvæ were five or six days old, the workers shut them up in their cells and stopped feeding them. that was because the larvæ had other things to do than eat. they had to spin their cocoons, and lie in them until they were grown and ready to come out among the older bees.
when a larva, or bee baby, has finished its cocoon, and is lying inside, it is called a pupa, and when a pupa is full grown and has torn its way out of the cocoon and wax, it is called a drone, or a worker, or a queen.
now the queen-mother was restless. she could hear the young queens piping in their cells, and she knew that they wanted to come out and drive her away. she wanted to get to them and stop their piping, but the workers stood in her way and prevented her. they knew it would not be well for the queen-mother to meet her royal children, and when these children tried to come out the workers covered the doors of their cells with another layer of wax, leaving little holes where they could put out their tongues and be fed.
this made the queen-mother more restless than ever. "if i cannot do as i wish to with my own children," she said, "i will leave the tree." and she began walking back and forth as fast as she could, and talked a great deal, and acted almost wild with impatience. the workers saw how she felt, and part of them decided to go with her. when a worker made up her mind to go with the queen-mother, she showed it by also acting wild and walking back and forth, and talking a great deal, sometimes fluttering her wings very fast. then she would go for honey, because when bees are about to swarm they fill their honey-pockets just as full as they can. at times the queen-mother would be quiet, and you might almost think that she had given up going. then suddenly she would grow restless again, and all the workers who were going with her would act as she did, and they would get so warm with excitement that the air in the tree became quite hot.
at last the queen-mother thought it time to start, and her followers came around her in the tree, and were very still for a minute. several of the workers had been flying in circles around the tree, and now they came to the doorway and called. then all came out, and hovered in the air a few minutes before stopping to rest on a bush near by. when they rested, the first bee held on to the bush, the next bee held on to her, and that was the way they did until they were all clinging tightly together in a squirming, dark-brown mass.
ah, then the queen-mother was happy! she felt that she was young again, and she thought, "how they love me, these dear workers!" she stroked her body with her legs to make herself as fine as possible, and she noticed, with pleasure, how slender she was growing. "i had thought i should never fly again," she said, "yet this is delightful. i believe i will go off by myself for a little while."
so she flew off by herself and was talking rather airily to a butterfly when two of the workers came after her.
"you may return to the rest," she said in a queenly way, as she motioned to them with her feelers. "i will come by and by."
"no," said they, "you must come at once or we shall all go back to the bee tree. you must stay with us. you must do your part as it should be done." and she had to go, for she knew in her heart that queens have to obey the law as well as other people.
after she had hung with the workers on the bush for some time, the ones who had gone ahead to find a new home for the swarm came back and gave the signal for the rest to follow. they went to an old log near the river-bank, and here they began the real work. crawling through an opening at one end, they found a roomy place within, and commenced to clean house at once.
"if there is anything i do like," said a worker, as she dropped a splinter of rotten wood outside the door, "it is house-cleaning."
"so do i," said her sister. "but what a fuss the drones always make when we try to do anything of the sort! a pretty-looking home we'd have if they took care of it!"
"i'm glad none of them came with us to this place," said the first worker. "i guess they knew they were not wanted."
"there, there!" said the queen-mother, coming up to where they were; "you must not talk in that way. it may be that you would rather do without drones, and perhaps they would rather do without you; but i need you both and i will not have any quarreling." when she said this she walked away with her head in the air, and the workers did not scold any more. they knew that she was right, and, after all, she was their queen, even if she did have to obey the laws.
next they got varnish from the buds of poplar trees and varnished over all the cracks and little holes in the walls of their home, leaving open only the place where they were to go in and out. they also covered with varnish a few heavy fragments of wood that lay on the floor of their home, and when this task was done it was all in order and ready for the furniture, that is, the comb.
you know how the comb looks, and you know how they get the wax from which to make it, but unless you are acquainted with the bees, and have seen them at work, you have no idea what busy creatures they are. the queen-mother, as soon as the cells were ready and she could begin laying eggs again, was as contented and happy as ever.
one day, when she was walking around a corner of the comb, she ran against a sad and discouraged-looking worker. "why, what is the matter?"
said she, kindly. "are you sick?"
"no," answered the worker. "i'm not sick and i'm not tired, only i want to get through."
"through with what?" asked the queen.
"with work! it is clean house, varnish the walls, make wax, build combs, get honey, make bread and jelly, and feed the babies. and when they get old enough they'll have to clean house, varnish the walls, make wax, build combs, get honey, make bread and jelly, and feed the babies. i want to know when it is going to stop, and bees can spend their time in play."
"never," said the queen-mother; and she spoke very gently, for she saw that the worker was crazy. "it will never stop. if you had nothing to do but play all your life you would soon want to die, and you ought to, for there is no place in this world for idlers. you know that after a while the drones die because they do nothing, and it is right they should."
"don't you ever get tired of your eggs?" asked the worker.
"no," answered the queen-mother, "i don't. you see, i have so much to think about, and happy thoughts make tasks light. and then, you know, it is not always the same kind of egg, and that makes a pleasant change for me. i will give you a motto to remember: 'as long as a bee is well, work is pleasant when done faithfully.'"
"perhaps that is the matter with me," said the worker, raising her drooping head. "i have been careless lately when i thought nobody was looking. i will try your way."
when she had gone, the queen-mother smiled to herself and said: "poor child! when work is no longer a pleasure, life is indeed sad. but any larva should know better than to work carelessly when she is not watched."
the haughty ground hog
not far from the home of the rabbits was another burrow where the ground hog lived, and there was a very kindly feeling between the neighbors.
they liked the same food, and as there was plenty for all, they often nibbled together near the edge of the forest. the little rabbits were fond of him and liked to listen to his stories. once the biggest little rabbit had run into the ground hog's burrow by mistake when he was frightened, and that was the beginning of a great friendship between them.
they were a queer-looking couple, for the rabbit was small and quick and dainty, while the ground hog, with his stout body covered with thick, reddish fur, his broad, flat head, and his short legs, was a clumsy fellow. to be sure, he could get out of sight quickly if he had to, but he never scampered around and kicked up his heels for the fun of it, as the rabbits did. he was too dignified to do that. he came of an old family and he could remember who his grandfather was. there were but few people in the forest who could do that; so, of course, he could not frisk like his neighbors.
perhaps if the ground hog had not belonged to so old a family, he might have had a better time. yet the thought that he could remember his grandfather was a great pleasure to him, and when he was talking he would often remark in the most careless way, "as my grandfather used to say"; or, "that reminds me of something my grandfather once did." some people said that he did this to show off; but it may be that they were envious.
however that may have been, the ground hog was certainly a haughty fellow, and if he had not been so gentle and kind a neighbor people would not have liked him. only once had he been known to get angry, and that was when a saucy young chipmunk had spoken of him as a woodchuck.
"woodchuck! woodchuck!" he had grunted. "you young bushy-tail, i am a ground hog, and the ground hog family lived in this forest long before you ever opened your eyes. people with good manners do not call us 'woodchucks.' we do not like the name. my grandfather could not endure it."
it was not very long after this that he told the wondering young rabbits about his grandfather. when talking, the ground hog rested by the edge of his burrow, sitting on his haunches, and waving his queer little forepaws whenever he told anything especially important. and this was the story:
"perhaps you may have heard me speak of my grandfather. ah, he was a ground hog worth seeing! he was large, and, although when i knew him the black fur on his back was streaked with gray, he was still handsome. he was clever, too. i have often heard my father say that he could dig the deepest and best burrow in the forest. and then he had such fine manners! there was not another ground hog in the country around who could eat as noisily as he, and it is said that when he was courting my grandmother she chose him because of the elegant way in which he sat up on his haunches. i have been told, children, that i am very much like him."
just here, a red-headed woodpecker gave a loud "rat-a-tat-tat" on the tree above the ground hog's head, and there was a look around her bill as though she wanted to laugh. the ground hog slowly turned his head to look at her as she flew away. "quite a good-looking young person," he said, "but badly brought up. she should know better than to disturb those who are talking. what was i saying, children?"
"you were telling how well your grandfather sat up on his haunches,"
said the smallest little rabbit.
"so i was! so i was! i must tell you how my grandfather came to know the world so well. when he was only a young fellow, he made his home for a time by a hen house, and so heard the talk of the barn-yard people.
once he heard them tell how the farmer watched on a certain winter day to see my grandfather come out of his burrow. of course, you children all know how we ground hogs do; in the fall we are very fat, and when the cold weather comes we go to sleep in our burrows to wait for spring.
sometimes we awaken and stretch, but we go to sleep again very soon.
then, when spring comes we are slender and have healthy appetites.
"the hens treated my grandfather with great politeness, and the black brahma cock showed plainly how honored they felt to have him there. they said that they were so glad my grandfather stayed out of his burrow awhile on this winter day when the farmer was watching, because they were in a hurry for warm weather. my grandfather did not know what they meant by that, but he was too wise to say so, and he found out by asking questions, that if a ground hog leaves his burrow on this certain day in winter, and sees his shadow, and goes back again, it will be cold for a long time after that. if he does not see his shadow, and stays out, it will soon be warm.
"you see now, children, how important our family is; and yet we are so modest that we had not even known that we made the weather until the hens told my grandfather. but that is the way! really great people often think the least of themselves."
"and do you make the weather?" asked the smallest little rabbit.
"i suppose we do," said the ground hog, with a smile. "it is a great care. i often say to myself: 'shall i have it warm, or shall i have it cold?' it worries me so that sometimes i can hardly eat."
"and how do you know when the day comes for you to make the weather?"
said the smallest little rabbit.
"ahem! well-er! i am sorry to say that my grandfather did not find out exactly what day it is that they watch for us, so i have to guess at that. but to think that we ground hogs make the weather for all the other people! it is worth a great deal to belong to such a family. i suppose i might have been a weasel, a fox, an owl, or an oriole. and it is a great thing to have known one's grandfather."
the little rabbits sat very still, wishing that they had known their grandfather, when suddenly the biggest one said: "if you should stay out of your burrow when that day comes, and another ground hog should go back into his burrow, how would the weather know what to do?"
"children," said the old ground hog, "i think your mother is calling to you. you might better go to see. good-by." and he waved his paw politely.
the seven little rabbits scampered away, but their mother was not calling them. she wasn't even there, and when they went back they couldn't find the ground hog. they wondered how he happened to make such a mistake. the red-headed woodpecker who came along at about that time, twisted her head on one side and said: "made-a-mistake! rat-a-tat-tat!
not he!"
the undecided rattlesnake
it is not often that one of the forest people has any trouble about making up his mind, but there was one large rattlesnake who had great difficulty in doing so. she lived in the southern edge of the forest, where the sunshine was clear and warm, and there were delightful crevices among the rocks in which she and all her friends and relatives could hide.
it seemed very strange that so old a snake should be so undecided as she was. it must be that she had a careless mother who did not bring her up in the right way. if that were so, one should indeed be sorry for her.
still even that would be no real excuse, for was she not old enough now to train herself? she had seven joints in the rattle on her tail and an eighth one growing, so you can see that she was no longer young, although, being healthy, she had grown her new joints and changed her skin oftener than some of her friends. in fact, she had grown children of her own, and if it had not been that they took after their father, they would have been a most helpless family. fortunately for them, their father was a very decided snake.
yes, it was exceedingly lucky for them. it may not have been so good a thing for him. his wife was always glad to have things settled for her, and when he said, "we will do this," she answered, "yes, dear." when he said, "we will not do that," she murmured, "no, dear." and when he said, "what shall we do?" she would reply, "oh, i don't know. what do you think we might better do?" he did not very often ask her opinion, and there were people in the forest who said he would never have talked matters over with her if he had not known that she would leave the decision to him.
now this is a bad way in which to have things go in any family, and it happened here as it would anywhere. he grew more and more selfish from having his own way all of the time, and his wife became less and less able to take care of herself. most people thought him a very devoted husband. perhaps he was. it is easy to be a devoted husband if you always have your own way.
one night mr. rattlesnake did not return to their home. nobody ever knew what had become of him. the red squirrel said that mrs. goldfinch said that the biggest little rabbit had told her that the ground hog had overheard mr. crow say that he thought he saw somebody that looked like mr. rattlesnake chasing a field mouse over toward the farm, but that he might have been mistaken. this was all so uncertain that mrs.
rattlesnake knew no more than she had known before. it was very trying.
"if i only knew positively," she said to her friend, mrs. striped snake, "i could do something, although i am sure i don't know what it would be."
mrs. striped snake tried to help her. "why not have one of your children come home to live with you?" she said pleasantly, for this year's children were now old enough to shift for themselves.
"i've thought of that," answered mrs. rattlesnake, "but i like a quiet life, and you know how it is. young snakes will be young snakes.
besides, i don't think they would want to come back."
"well, why not be alone, then?"
"oh, it is so lonely," replied mrs. rattlesnake, with a sigh.
"everything reminds me so of my husband, and that makes me sad. if i lived somewhere else it would be different."
"then why not move?" said mrs. striped snake, briskly. "i would do that.
find a nice crack in the rock just big enough for one, or make a cosy little hole in the ground somewhere near here. then if he comes back he can find you easily. i would do that. i certainly would."
she spoke so firmly that mrs. rattlesnake said she would, she would to-morrow. and her friend went home thinking it was all settled. that shows how little she really knew mrs. rattlesnake.
the more mrs. rattlesnake thought it over that night, the more she dreaded moving. "if he does not come back," she sighed, "i may marry again in the spring, and then i might have to move once more. i believe i will ask somebody else what i ought to do."
so in the morning she began to consult her friends. they all told her to move, and she decided to do it. then she could not make up her mind whether to take a rock-crevice or make a hole in the ground. it took another day of visiting to settle that it should be a hole in the ground. a fourth day was spent in finding just the right place for her home, and on the fifth day she began work.
by the time the sun was over the tree-tops, she wished she had chosen some other place, and thought best to stop and talk to some of her friends about it. when she returned she found herself obliged to cast her skin, which had been growing tight and dry for some time. this was hard work, and she was too tired to go on with her home-making, so she lay in the sunshine and admired her beautiful, long, and shining body of reddish brown spotted with black. her rattle had eight joints now, for when a rattlesnake casts the old skin a new joint is always uncovered at the end of the tail. she waved it quickly to see how an eight-jointed rattle would sound. "lovely!" she said. "lovely! like the seeds of the wild cucumber shaking around in their dry and prickly case."
one could not tell all the things that happened that fall, or how very, very, very tired her friends became of having her ask their advice. she changed her mind more times than there are seeds in a milkweed pod, and the only thing of which she was always sure was eating. when there was food in sight she did not stop for anybody's advice. she ate it as fast as she could, and if she had any doubts about the wisdom of doing so, she kept them to herself.
when winter came she had just got her new home ready, and after all she went when invited to spend the winter with a cave party of other snakes.
they coiled themselves together in a great mass and slept there until spring. as the weather grew warmer, they began to stir, wriggling and twisting themselves free.
two bachelor snakes asked her to marry. one was a fine old fellow with a twelve-jointed rattle. the other was just her own age.
"to be sure i will," she cried, and the pits between her nostrils and her ears looked more like dimples than ever. "only you must wait until i can make up my mind which one to marry."
"oh, no," they answered, "don't go to all that trouble. we will fight and decide it for you."
it was a long fight, and the older of the two snakes had a couple of joints broken off from his rattle before it was over. still he beat the other one and drove him away. when he came back for his bride he found her crying. "what is the matter?" said he, quite sternly.
"oh, that p-poor other b-bachelor!" she sobbed. "i b-believe i will g-go after him. i think p-perhaps i l-love him the b-better."
"no, you don't, mrs. rattlesnake," said the fine old fellow who had just won the fight. "you will do no such thing. you will marry me and never speak to him again. when i have lost two joints of my rattle in fighting for you, i intend to have you myself, and i say that you love me very dearly. do you hear?"
"yes, darling," she answered, as she wiped her eyes on the grass, "very dearly." and they lived most happily together.
"he reminds me so much of the first mr. rattlesnake," she said to her friends. "so strong, so firm, so quick to decide!"
and the friends said to each other, "well, let us be thankful he is. we have been bothered enough by her coming to us for advice which she never followed."
the quarrelsome mole
when the first hillock of fresh brown earth was thrown up in the edge of the forest, the people who lived there said to each other. "can it be that we have a new neighbor?"
perhaps the rabbits, the ground hogs, and the snakes cared the most, for they also made their homes in the ground; yet even the orioles wanted to know all about it. none of them had ever been acquainted with a mole.
they had seen the ridges in the meadows beneath which the moles had their runways, and they knew that when the moles were making these long streets under ground, they had to cut an opening through the grass once in a while and throw the loose earth out. this new mound in the forest looked exactly like those in the meadow, so they decided there must be a mole in the neighborhood.
if that were so, somebody should call upon him and get acquainted; but how could they call? mrs. red squirrel said: "why can't some of you people who are so clever at digging, burrow down and find him?"
"yes indeed," twittered the birds; "that is a good plan."
but mr. red squirrel smiled at his wife and said: "i am afraid, bushy-tail (that was his pet name for her) that none of our friends here could overtake the mole. you know he is a very fast runner. if they were following they could never catch him."
"let them burrow down ahead of the place where he is working, then,"
said she.
"and the mole would turn and go another way, not knowing it was a friend looking for him."
"well, why not make an opening into one of his runways and go into it, hunting until he is found?" said mrs. red squirrel, who was like some other people in not wishing to give up her own ideas.
"yes," cried a mischievous young woodpecker; "let the ground hog go. you surely don't think him too fat?"
now there was no denying that the ground hog was getting too stout to look well, and people thought he would be angry at this. perhaps he was angry. the little rabbits were sure of it. they said they knew by the expression of his tail. still, you know, the ground hog came of a good family, and well-bred people do not say mean things even if they are annoyed. he combed the fur on his face with both paws, and answered with a polite bow: "if i had the slender and graceful form of my charming friend, mrs. red squirrel, i should be delighted to do as she suggests."
that was really a very clever thing for mr. ground hog to say. it was much more agreeable than if he had grunted out, "much she knows about it! we burrowing people are all too large." and now mrs. red squirrel was pleased and happy although her plan was not used.
that night mrs. ground hog said to her husband: "i didn't know you admired mrs. red squirrel so much." and he answered: "pooh! admire her?
she is a very good-looking person for one of her family, and i want to be polite to her for her husband's sake. he and i have business together. but for my part i prefer more flesh. i could never have married a slender wife, and i am pleased to see, my dear, that you are stouter than you were." and this also shows how clever a fellow mr.
ground hog was.
the very next night, as luck would have it, the mole came out of his runway for a scamper on the grass. mr. ground hog saw him and made his acquaintance. "we are glad to have you come," said he. "you will find it a pleasant neighborhood. people are very friendly."
"well, i'm glad of that," answered the mole. "i don't see any sense in people being disagreeable, myself, but in the meadow which i have just left there were the worst neighbors in the world. i stood it just as long as i could, and then i moved."
"i am sorry to hear that," said the ground hog, gently. "i had always supposed it a pleasant place to live in." he began to wonder what kind of fellow the mole was. he did not like to hear him say such unkind things before a new acquaintance. sometimes unpleasant things have to be said, but it was not so now.
"umph!" said the mole. "you have to live with people to know them. of course, we moles had no friends among the insects. we are always glad to meet them in the ground, but they do not seem so glad to meet us. that is easily understood when you remember what hungry people moles are.
friendship is all very well, but when a fellow's stomach is empty, he can't let that stand in the way of a good dinner. there was no such reason why the tree frog or the garter snake should dislike me."
"are you sure they did dislike you?"
"certain of it. i remember how one night i wanted to talk with the garter snake, and asked him to come out of his hole for a visit in the moonlight. he wouldn't come."
"what did he say?" asked the ground hog.
"not a word! and that was the worst of it. think how provoking it was for me to stand there and call and call and not get any reply."
"perhaps he was not at home," suggested the ground hog.
"that's what he said when i spoke to him. said he was spending the night down by the river. as though i'd be likely to believe that! i guess he saw that he couldn't fool me, though, for after i told him what i thought of him he wriggled away without saying a word."
"still he is not so disagreeable as the tree frog," said the mole, after a pause in which the ground hog had been trying not to laugh. the ground hog said afterward that it was the funniest sight imaginable to see the stout little mole scampering back and forth in the moonlight, and stopping every few minutes to scold about the meadow people. the twitching of his tiny tail and the jerky motions of his large, pink-palmed digging hands, showed how angry he grew in thinking of them, and his pink snout fairly quivered with rage.
"i will tell you about the tree frog," said the mole. "he is one of these fellows who are always just so good-natured and polite. i can't endure them. i say it's putting on airs to act that way. i was telling him what i thought of the garter snake, and what should he do but draw himself up and say: 'excuse me, but the garter snake is a particular friend of mine, and i do not care to hear him spoken of in that way.' i guess i taught him one good lesson, though. i told him he was just the kind of person i should expect the garter snake to like, and that i wished them much joy together, but that i didn't want anything to do with them.
"it was only a short time after this that i had such trouble about making my fort. whenever i started to dig in a place i would find some other mole there ahead of me."
"and then you would have to go somewhere else, of course?" said the ground hog.
"i'd like to know why!" said the mole, with his glossy silver-brown fur on end. "no indeed! i had a perfect right to dig wherever i wished, and i would tell them so, and they would have to go elsewhere. one mole was bad-tempered enough to say that he had as much right in the meadow as anybody, and i had to tussle with him and bite him many times before he saw his mistake.... they are disagreeable people over there, but why are you going so soon? i thought we would have a good visit together."
"i promised to meet mrs. ground hog," said her husband, "and must go.
good-night!" and he trotted away.
not long afterward this highly respectable couple were feeding together in the moonlight. "what do you think of the mole?" said she.
"well, er ahem," answered her husband. "you know, my dear, that i do not like to talk against people, and i might better not tell you exactly what i think of him. he is a queer-looking fellow, and i always distrust anyone who will not look me in the eye. perhaps that is not his fault, for the fur hides his eyes and he wears his ears inside of his head; but i must say that a fiercer or more disagreeable-looking snout i never saw. he has had trouble with all his old neighbors, and a fellow who cannot get along peaceably in one place will not in another. he is always talking about his rights and what he thinks "
"you have told me enough," said mrs. ground hog, interrupting him.
"nobody ever liked a person who insists on his 'rights' every time. and such a person never enjoys life. what a pity it is!" and she gave a sigh that shook her fat sides. "now, i had it all planned that he should marry and set up housekeeping, and that i should have another pleasant neighbor soon."
"ah! mrs. ground hog," said her husband teasingly, "i knew you would be thinking of that. you are a born matchmaker. now i think we could stand a few bachelors around here, fine young fellows who have nothing to do but enjoy life." and his eyes twinkled as he said it.
"as though you did not enjoy life!" answered his wife. "still, i could not wish any young mole such a husband as this fellow. it is a great undertaking to marry a grumpy bachelor and teach him the happiness of living for others." and she looked very solemn.
"i suppose you found it so?" said mr. ground hog, sidling up toward her.
"what a tease you are!" said his wife. "you know that i am happy." and really, of all the couples on whom the moon looked that night, there was not a happier one than this pair of ground hogs; and there was not a lonelier or more miserable person than the mole, who guarded his own rights and told people what he thought of them. but it is always so.
the wild turkeys come
the wild turkeys are a wandering people, and stay in one place only long enough to rear their young. one could hardly say that they lived in the forest, but every year when the acorns and beechnuts were ripe, they came for a visit. it is always an exciting time when the turkeys are seen gathering on the farther side of the river and making ready to fly over. some of the forest people have started for the warmer country in the south, and those who still remain are either talking over their plans for flight, or working hard, if they are to spend the winter in the north, to get their stores of food ready.
it was so this year. one morning a red-headed woodpecker brought the news that the turkeys were gathering. the ground hog heard of it just as he was going to sleep after a night of feeding and rambling in the edge of the meadow. one of the young rabbits told him, and coaxed him to stay up to see the newcomers.
"i've never seen turkeys in my life," said the young rabbit, "and they say it is great fun to watch them. oh, please come with me to the river-bank and see the turkeys cross over. please do!"
"ah-h-h," yawned the ground hog. "you might better ask somebody who has not been up all night. i am too sleepy."
"you won't be sleepy when you reach the river-bank," said the rabbit.
"beside, i think there should be someone there to meet them."
at this, the ground hog raised his drooping head, opened his blinking eyes, and answered with great dignity: "there should indeed be someone.
i will go at once."
when they reached the river-bank there was a sight well worth seeing. on the farther side of the water were a great many turkeys. old gobblers were there, and the mother turkeys with their broods of children, all looking as fine as you please, in their shining black coats. when they stood in the shadow, one might think that they wore no color but the brilliant red of their heads and necks, where there were no feathers to cover their wrinkled skin. when they walked out into the sunshine, however, their feathers showed gleams of beautiful purple and green, and the rabbit thought them the most wonderful great creatures he had ever seen.
"look at them now!" he cried. "why do those largest ones walk up and down in front of the rest and scold them?"
"they are the gobblers," answered the ground hog, "and they are doing that to show that they are not afraid to cross the river. they strut and gobble, and strut and gobble, and say: 'who's-afraid? who's-afraid?'
until the rest are ready to fly over."
"now the others are doing the same thing," said the rabbit, as the mothers and young turkeys began to strut back and forth.
"that shows that they are willing to cross," answered the ground hog.
"now they will fly up to the very tops of the trees on the hill and visit there for a time. it is always so. they start from the highest point they can find. it will be some time before they come over, and i will take a short nap. be sure to awaken me when they start. i want to welcome them to the forest." and the ground hog curled himself up beside a log and went to sleep.
the rabbit wandered around and ate all the good things he could find.
then he fell to wondering how it would feel to be a bird. he thought it would be great fun to fly. to pass so swiftly through the air must be delightful, and then to sweep grandly down and alight softly on the ground without having people know that you were coming!
he had a good mind to try it. there was nobody to watch him, and he crept up the trunk of a fallen tree which leaned over against its neighbors. it was a foolish thing to do, and he knew it, but young rabbits are too full of mischief to always be wise.
"i will hold my hind legs very still," he thought, "and flap my forelegs for wings." with that he jumped off and came crashing down upon the dry leaves. he felt weak and dizzy, and as he picked himself up and looked around he hoped that nobody had seen him. "it may be a great deal of fun to fly," he said, "but it is no fun alighting from your flight unless you have real feather wings. it is too bumpy when you fly with your legs."
at this minute he heard an old gobbler call out, and saw the flock of turkeys coming toward him. "wake up! wake up!" he cried to the ground hog. but the ground hog never moved.
still the turkeys came nearer. the rabbit could see that the fat old ones were getting ahead of the others, and that here and there a young or weak turkey had to drop into the river and swim, because his wings were tired. they got so near that he could see the queer little tufts of wiry feathers which the gobblers wear hanging from their breast, and could see the swaying scarlet wattles under their beaks. he called again to the ground hog, and getting no answer, poked him three times with his head.
the ground hog turned over, stretched, yawned, moved his jaws a few times as though he dreamed of eating fresh spring grass, and then fell asleep once more. after that the rabbit left him alone.
the first to alight were the gobblers, and they began at once to strut and chatter. next came the mother turkeys and their young, and last of all came the weak ones who swam across. it was a fine sight to see them come in. the swimmers spread their tails, folded their wings tightly, stretched their necks, and struck out swiftly and strongly with their feet.
the young rabbit could hear a group of mothers talking together. "the gobblers are growing quite fond of the children," said one.
"yes," said another; "my husband told me yesterday that he was very proud of our little ones."
"well, it is the season for them to begin to walk together," said the first speaker; "but i never in my life had such a time as i had this spring. i thought my husband would break every egg i laid."
"i had a hard time too," said the other. "none of my eggs were broken, but after my chicks were hatched i had to hurry them out of their father's sight a dozen times a day."
"it is very trying," said a third mother turkey with a sigh; "but that is always the way with the gobblers. i suppose the dear fellows can't help it;" and she looked lovingly over at her husband as he strutted around with his friends. you would not have believed if you had seen her fond looks, and heard her husband's tender "gobble," that they had hardly spoken to each other all summer. to be sure, it was not now as it had been in the springtime. then he would have beaten any other gobbler who came near her, he loved her so; still, the rabbit could see as he watched them that when he found some very large and fine acorns, this gobbler would not eat them all, but called his wife to come and share with him; and he knew that they were happy together in their own turkey way of being happy.
at this minute the ground hog opened his eyes and staggered to his feet.
the loud talking had awakened him. he did not look very dignified just now. his fur was rumpled, and he blinked often from sleepiness. there was a dry leaf caught on one of his ears, too, that made him look very odd. the rabbit wanted to laugh, but he did not dare to do so. the ground hog walked toward the gobblers, and raised himself on his haunches.
"good-evening, good-evening," said he (it was really morning, you know). "we are very glad to welcome you to the forest. make yourselves perfectly at home. the grass is not so tender as it was a while ago, yet i think that you will find good feeding," and he waved his paws politely.
"thank-you, thank-you!" answered the gobblers, while the mothers and young turkeys came crowding up to look at the ground hog. "we came for the acorns and nuts. we shall certainly enjoy ourselves."
"that is right," said the ground hog heartily. "we have a very fine forest here. you will pardon me for remarking it. the pond people have a saying that is very true: 'it's a mighty poor frog that won't croak for his own puddle.' and my grandfather used to say that if a ground hog didn't love his own home he was a very poor hog indeed. good-night, my friends, good-night." and he trotted happily away, followed by the rabbit.
when he was gone, the turkeys said: "how very kind of him!" and "what fine manners!" and the young rabbit thought to himself: "it is queer. he was sleepy and his fur was rumpled, and that leaf bobbed around his ear when he talked. he said 'evening' instead of 'morning,' and spoke as though turkeys came here to eat grass. and yet they all liked him, and were pleased by what he said."
you see the young rabbit had not yet learned that the power of fine manners is more than that of looks; and that people could not think of the ground hog's mistakes in speaking because they knew his kindness of heart.
the travellers go south
one night a maple tree, the very one under which mr. red squirrel sat when he first came to the forest, dreamed of her winter resting-time, and when she awakened early in the morning she found that her leaves were turning yellow. they were not all brightly colored, but on each was an edging, or a tip, or a splash of gold. you may be sure that the forest people noticed it at once.
"i told you so," chirruped a robin to her mate. "the orioles went long ago, and the bobolinks start to-day. we must think about our trip to the south." when she said this, she hopped restlessly from twig to twig with an air of being exceedingly busy.
her husband did not answer, but began to arrange his new coat of feathers. perhaps he was used to her fussy ways and thought it just as well to keep still. he knew that none of the robins would start south until the weather became much colder, and he did not think it necessary to talk about it yet. perhaps, too, mr. robin was a trifle contrary and was all the more slow and quiet because his wife was uneasy. in that case one could hardly blame her for talking over the family plans with the neighbors.
later in the day, a bobolink came up from the marsh to say good-by. he had on his travelling suit of striped brown, and you would never have known him for the same gay fellow who during the spring and early summer wore black and buff and sang so heartily and sweetly. now he did not sing at all, and slipped silently from bush to bush, only speaking when he had to. he was a good fellow and everyone disliked to have him go.
mrs. cowbird came up while they were talking. now that she did not care to lay any more eggs, the other birds were quite friendly with her. they began to talk over the summer that was past, and said how finely the young birds were coming on. "by the way," said she, in the most careless manner possible, "i ought to have a few children round here somewhere.
can anybody tell me where they are?"
mrs. goldfinch looked at her husband and he looked at the sky. the warblers and the vireos, who had known about the strange egg in the goldfinches' nest, had already left for the winter, and there seemed to be no use in telling their secret now or quarrelling over what was past.
some of the other birds might have told mrs. cowbird a few things, but they also kept still.
"it is a shame," she said. "i never laid a finer lot of eggs in my life, and i was very careful where i put them. i wish i knew how many there were, but i forgot to count. i have been watching and watching for my little birds to join our flock; i was sure i should know them if i saw them. mothers have such fine feelings, you know, in regard to their children." (as though she had any right to say that!)
the mourning doves were there with their young son and daughter, and you could see by looking at them that they were an affectionate family. "we shall be the last to go south," they cooed. "we always mean to come north in the very early spring and stay as late as possible. this year we came much later than usual, but it could not be helped." they had spoken so before, and rather sadly. it was said that they could tell a sorrowful story if they would; but they did not wish to sadden others by it, and bore their troubles together bravely and lovingly.
"how do the new feathers work?" asked a crow, flying up at this minute and looking blacker than ever in his fall coat. then all the birds began to talk about dress. as soon as their broods were raised, you know, their feathers had begun to drop out, and they had kept on moulting until all of the old ones were gone and the new ones on. when birds are moulting they never feel well, and when it is over they are both happy and proud.
"i changed later than usual this year," said the crow, "and i feel that i have the very latest fashions." this was a joke which he must have picked up among the barnyard people, and nobody knows where they got it. fashions never change in the forest.
"i think," remarked a red-headed woodpecker, "that i have the best wing feathers now that i ever had. they seem to be a little longer, and they hook together so well. i almost wish i were going south to try them on a long journey."
"mr. woodpecker's wing feathers are certainly excellent," said his wife, who was always glad to see him well dressed. "i am sure that the strongest wind will never part them. i don't see how the owls can stand it to wear their feathers unhooked so that some of the air passes through their wings each time they flap them. it must make flying hard."
"well, if you were an owl you would understand," chuckled the crow. "if their great wings were like ours, the noise of their flying would scare every creature within hearing, and there would not be much fun in hunting."
and so they chatted on, while from the meadow came the sound of the happy insects piping in the sunshine. it was chilly now at night and in the early morning, and they could give concerts only at noonday. the next day the wild turkeys came and there was great excitement in the forest. the squirrels were busier than ever storing up all the acorns that they could before the newcomers reached the oak trees; and the blue jays were so jealous of the turkeys that they overate every day for fear there would not be enough to go around. as though there were any danger!
the ground hog was getting so sleepy now that he would doze off while people were talking to him, and then he would suddenly straighten up and say: "yes, yes, yes! don't think that i was asleep, please. the colors of the trees are so bright that they tire my eyes and i sometimes close them." the dear old fellow really never knew how he had been nodding.
the snakes, too, were growing dull and slow of motion, while the bats talked freely of hanging themselves up for the winter. the grouse and quail made daily trips to the edges of the grain-fields, and found rich picking among the stubble. you could almost fancy that they came home each night fatter than when they went away in the morning.
life went on in this way for many days, and the birds had all stopped singing. there were no more happy concerts at sunrise and no more carols at evening; only chirrupings and twitterings as the feathered people hopped restlessly from one perch to another. all could see that they were busily thinking and had no time for music. the truth was that each bird who was not to spend the winter in the forest felt as though something were drawing drawing drawing him southward. it was something they could not see or hear, and yet it was drawing drawing drawing all day and all night. they spoke of it often to each other, and the older birds told the young ones how, before long, they would all start south, and fly over land and water until they reached their winter home.
"how do we know where to go?" asked the children.
"all that you have to do," the older ones said, "is to follow us."
"and how do you know?" they asked.
"why, we have been there before," they answered; "and we can see the places over which we pass. but perhaps that is not the real reason, for sometimes we fly over such great stretches of water that we can see nothing else and it all looks alike. then we cannot see which way to go, but still we feel that we are drawn south, and we only have to think about that and fly onward. the fathers and sons can fly the faster and will reach there first. the mothers and daughters come a few days later.
we never make a mistake."
"it is wonderful, wonderful," thought a young rabbit on the grass below.
"i must watch them when they go."
the very next morning the forest people awakened to find a silvery frost on the grass and feel the still air stirred by the soft dropping of damp red, brown, and yellow leaves from the trees. over the river and all the lowland near it hung a heavy veil of white mist.
"it is time!" whispered the robins to each other.
"it is time!" cooed the mourning doves.
"it is time!" cried the cowbirds in their hoarse voices.
all through the forest there was restlessness and quiet haste. the juncoes had already come from the cold northland and were resting from their long flight. the ground hogs, the rabbits, and the squirrels were out to say good-by. the owls peeped from their hollow trees, shading their eyes from the strong light of the sun. and then the travellers went. the robins started in family parties. the mourning doves slipped quietly away. the cowbirds went in a dashing crowd. and the crows, after much talking and disputing on the tree-tops, took a noisy farewell of the few members of the flock who were to remain behind, and, joining other flocks from the north, flew off in a great company which darkened the sky and caused a shadow to pass over the stubble-field almost like that of a summer cloud.
"they are gone!" sighed the ground hog and his wife. "we shall miss them sadly. well, we can dream about them, and that will be a comfort."
"jay! jay!" shrieked a handsome-crested fellow from the tree above.
"what if they are gone? they will be back in the spring, and we have plenty to eat. what is the use of feeling sad? jay! jay!"
but all people are not so heartless as the hungry blue jays, and the song-birds had many loving friends who missed them and longed for their return.
the ruffed grouse's story
the ruffed grouse cocked his crested head on one side and looked up through the bare branches to the sky. it was a soft gray, and in the west were banks of bluish clouds. "i think it will snow very soon," said he. "mrs. grouse, are the children all ready for cold weather?"
"all ready," answered his cheerful little wife. "they have had their thickest feathers on for quite a while. the rabbits were saying the other day that they had never seen a plumper or better clothed flock than ours." and her beautiful golden-brown eyes shone with pride as she spoke.
indeed, the young ruffed grouse were a family of whom she might well be proud. twelve healthy and obedient children do not fall to the lot of every forest mother, and she wished with a sad little sigh that her other two eggs had hatched. she often thought of them with longing. how lovely it would have been to have fourteen children! but at that moment her brood came crowding around her in fright.
"some cold white things," they said, "came tumbling down upon us and scared us. the white things didn't say a word, but they came so fast that we think they must be alive. tell us what to do. must we hide?"
"why, that is snow!" exclaimed their mother. "it drops from the clouds up yonder quite as the leaves drop from the trees in the fall. it will not hurt you, but we must find shelter."
"what did i tell you, mrs grouse?" asked her husband. "i was certain that it would snow before night. i felt it in my quills." and mr. grouse strutted with importance. it always makes one feel so very knowing when he has told his wife exactly what will happen.
"how did you feel it in your quills?" asked one of his children. "shall i feel it in my quills when i am as old as you are?"
"perhaps," was the answer. "but until you do feel it you can never understand it, for it is not like any other feeling that there is."
then they all started for a low clump of bushes to find shelter from the storm. once they were frightened by seeing a great creature come tramping through the woods towards them. "a man!" said mr. grouse.
"hide!" said mrs. grouse, and each little grouse hid under the leaves so quickly that nobody could see how it was done. one might almost think that a strong wind had blown them away. the mother pretended that she had a broken wing, and hopped away, making such pitiful sounds that the man followed to pick her up. when she had led him far from her children, she, too, made a quick run and hid herself; and although the man hunted everywhere, he could not find a single bird.
you know that is always the way in grouse families, and even if the man's foot had stirred the leaves under which a little one was hiding, the grouse would not have moved or made a sound. the children are brought up to mind without asking any questions. when their mother says, "hide!" they do it, and never once ask "why?" or answer, "as soon as i have swallowed this berry." it is no wonder that the older ones are proud of their children. any mother would be made happy by having one child obey like that, and think of having twelve!
at last, the whole family reached the bushes where they were to stay, and then they began to feed near by. "eat all you can," said mr. grouse, "before the snow gets deep. you may not have another such good chance for many days." so they ate until their little stomachs would not hold one more seed or evergreen bud.
all this time the snowflakes were falling, but the grouse children were no longer afraid of them. sometimes they even chased and snapped at them as they would at a fly in summer-time. it was then, too, that they learned to use snow-shoes. the oldest child had made a great fuss when he found a fringe of hard points growing around his toes in the fall, and had run peeping to his mother to ask her what was the matter. she had shown him her own feet, and had told him how all the ruffed grouse have snow-shoes of that kind grow on their feet every winter.
"we do not have to bother about them at all," she said. "they put themselves on when the weather gets cold in the fall, and they take themselves off when spring comes. we each have a new pair every year, and when they are grown we can walk easily over the soft snow. without them we should sink through and flounder."
when night came they all huddled under the bushes, lying close together to keep each other warm. the next day they burrowed into a snow-drift and made a snug place there which was even better than the one they left; the soft white coverlet kept the wind out so well. it was hard for the little ones to keep quiet long, and to amuse them mr. grouse told how he first met their mother in the spring.
"it was a fine, sunshiny day," he said, "and everybody was happy. i had for some time been learning to drum, and now i felt that i was as good a drummer as there was in the forest. so i found a log (every ruffed grouse has to have his own place, you know) and i jumped up on it and strutted back and forth with my head high in the air. it was a dusky part of the forest and i could not see far, yet i knew that a beautiful young grouse was somewhere near, and i hoped that if i drummed very well she might come to me."
"i know!" interrupted one of the little grouse. "it was our mother."
"well, it wasn't your mother then, my chick," said mr. grouse, "for that was long, long before you were hatched."
"she was our mother afterwards, anyway," cried the young grouse. "i just know she was!"
mr. grouse's eyes twinkled, but he went gravely on. "at last i flapped my wing's hard and fast, and the soft drumming sound could be heard far and near. 'thump-thump-thump-thump-thump; thump-thump-rup-rup-rup-rup-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r.' i waited, but nobody came. then i drummed again, and after that i was sure that i heard a rustling in the leaves. i drummed a third time, and then, children, there came the beautiful young grouse, breaking her way through the thicket and trying to look as though she didn't know that i was there."
"did she know?" cried the little grouse.
"you must ask your mother that," he answered, "for it was she who came.
ah, what happy days we had together all spring! we wandered all through this great forest and even made some journeys into the edge of the meadow. still, there was no place we loved as we did the dusky hollow by the old log where we first met. one day your mother told me that she must begin housekeeping and that i must keep out of the way while she was busy. so i had to go off with a crowd of other ruffed grouse while she fixed her nest, laid her eggs, and hatched out you youngsters. it was rather hard to be driven off in that way, but you know it is the custom among grouse. we poor fellows had to amuse ourselves and each other until our wives called us home to help take care of the children.
we've been at that work ever since."
"oh!" said one of the young grouse. "oh, i am so glad that you drummed, and that she came when she heard you. who would we have had to take care of us if it hadn't happened just so?"
that made them all feel very solemn and mr. grouse couldn't answer, and mrs. grouse couldn't answer, and none of the little grouse could answer because, you see, it is one of the questions that hasn't any answer.
still, they were all there and happy, so they didn't bother their crested heads about it very long.
a mild day in winter
it had been a cold and windy winter. day after day the storm-clouds had piled up in the northwest and spread slowly over the sky, dropping great ragged flakes of snow down to the shivering earth. then the forest trees were clothed in fleecy white garments, and the branches of the evergreens drooped under their heavy cloak.
then there had been other days, when a strong wind stripped the trees of their covering, and brought with it thousands of small, hard flakes.
these flakes were drier than the ragged ones had been, and did not cling so lovingly to everything they touched. they would rather frolic on the ground, rising again and again from their resting-places to dance around with the wind, and help make great drifts and overhanging ledges of snow in the edge of the forest, where there was more open ground.
it is true that not all the winter had been cold and stormy. there were times when the drifts melted slowly into the earth, and the grass, which last summer had been so tender and green, showed brown and matted on the ground. still the great horned owl and his wife could not find enough to eat. "we do not mean to complain," said he with dignity, as he scratched one ear with his feathered right foot, "but neither of us has had a meal hearty enough for a healthy robin, since the first heavy snow came."
this was when he was talking to his cousin, the screech owl. "hearty enough for a robin!" exclaimed mrs. great horned owl. "i should say we hadn't. i don't think i have had enough for a goldfinch, and that is pretty hard for a bird of my size. i am so thin that my feathers feel loose."
"have you been so hungry that you dreamed about food?" asked the screech owl.
"n-no, i can't say that i have," said the great horned owl, while his wife shook her head solemnly.
"ah, that is dreadful," said the screech owl. "i have done that several times. only yesterday, while i lay in my nest-hollow, i dreamed that i was hunting. there was food everywhere, but just as i flew down to eat, it turned into pieces of ice. when i awakened i was almost starved and so cold that my beak chattered."
it was only a few days after the screech owl's call upon his cousins that he awakened one night to find the weather milder, and the ground covered with only a thin coating of soft snow. the beautiful round moon was shining down upon him, and in the western sky the clouds were still red from the rays of the setting sun.
somewhere, far beyond the fields and forests of this part of the world, day-birds were beginning to stir, and thousands of downy heads were drawn from under sheltering wings, while in the barnyards the cocks were calling their welcome to the sun. but the screech owl did not think of this. he aroused his wife and they went hunting. when they came back they did not dream about food. they had eaten all that they could, and the great horned owl and his wife had made a meal hearty enough for a dozen robins, and a whole flock of goldfinches. it was a good thing for the day-birds that this was so, for it is said that sometimes, when food is very scarce, owls have been known to hunt by daylight.
when morning came and it was the moon's turn to sink out of sight in the west, the owls went to bed in their hollow trees, and crows, blue jays, woodpeckers, chickadees, grouse, quail, squirrels, and rabbits came out.
the goldfinches were there too, but you would never have known the husbands and fathers of the flock, unless you had seen them before in their winter clothing, which is like that worn by the wives and children. here, too, were the winter visitors, the snow buntings and the juncos, brimming over with happiness and news of their northern homes.
this warm day made them think of the coming springtime, and they were already planning their flight.
"i wish you would stay with us all summer," said a friendly goldfinch, as he dirted the snow off from a tall brown weed and began to pick out and eat the seeds.
"stay all summer!" exclaimed a jolly little snow bunting. "why should we want to stay? perhaps if you would promise to keep the snow and ice we might."
"why not ask the goldfinches to come north with us?" suggested a junco.
"that would be much more sensible, for they can stand the cold weather as well as we, but we cannot stand warm days, such as i hear they have in this part of the country after the ice melts."
then the older people of the group began to talk of the cares of life and many other things which did not interest their children, so the younger ones wandered away from them.
"i say," called a young junco to a young snow bunting, "wouldn't you like to show some of these playmates of ours the countries where we were born?"
"yes indeed," answered the snow bunting. "wouldn't they open their eyes, though? i'd like to have them see the rocks up there."
"and the animals," said the junco.
"yes! wouldn't they stare at the bears, though!"
"humph," said a blue jay. "i wouldn't care very much about seeing bears, would you?" and he turned to a crow near by.
"no," said the crow. "i don't think very much of bears anyway." he said this as though he had seen them all his life, but the chickadees say that he never saw even a cub.
"they haven't any big animals here," said the junco to the snow bunting.
"haven't we, though?" replied the blue jay. "guess you wouldn't say that if you saw the ground hog. would he say that?" he asked, turning to the young grouse, quail, woodpeckers, goldfinches, chickadees, squirrels, and rabbits who stood around listening.
"no indeed!" they answered, for they wanted their visitors to understand that the forest was a most wonderful place, and they really thought the ground hog very large.
"i don't believe he is as big as a bear" said the snow bunting, with his bill in the air.
"how big is he?" asked the junco.
now the blue jay was afraid that the birds from the north were getting the better of him, and he felt very sure that they would leave before the ground hog had finished his winter sleep, so he did what no honest bird would have even thought of doing. he held his crested head very high and said, "he is bigger than that rock, a great deal bigger."
the crow looked at the rock and gave a hoarse chuckle, for it was a hundred times larger than the ground hog. the grouse, quail, woodpeckers, goldfinches, chickadees, squirrels, and rabbits looked at each other without saying a word. they knew how the blue jay had lied, and it made them ashamed. the grouse pretended to fix their snow-shoes.
they did not want to look at the birds from the north.
the snow buntings and juncos felt that it would not do to talk about bears to people who had such a great creature as the ground hog living among them. "he must be wonderful," they said. "where does he sleep?"
"in the bats' cave," answered the blue jay, who having told one lie, now had to tell another to cover it up. "he sleeps in the middle and there is just room left around the edges for the bats."
now at this very time the ground hog was awake in his burrow. he could feel that it was warmer and he wanted room to stretch. he thought it would seem good to have an early spring after such a cold winter, so he decided to take a walk and make the weather, as his grandfather had done. when he came out of his burrow he heard a great chattering and went to see what was the matter. that was how it happened that soon after the blue jay had told about the bats' cave, one wide-awake young junco saw a reddish-brown animal trotting over the grass toward them.
"who is that?" he cried.
the grouse, quail, woodpeckers, goldfinches, chickadees, squirrels, and rabbits gave one look. "oh, there is the ground hog!" they cried. then they remembered and were ashamed again because of what the blue jay had said.
"oh!" said the snow buntings and the juncos. "so that is the ground hog!
big as that rock, is he? and you don't think much of bears?"
the crow pointed one claw at the blue jay. "i never said he was as big as that rock. he is the fellow that said it."
"i don't care," said the blue jay; "i was only fooling. i meant to tell you after a while. it's a good joke on you." but he had a sneaky look around the bill as he spoke, and nobody believed him. before long, he and the crow were glad enough to get away from the rest and go away together. yet even then they were not happy, for each began to blame the other, and they had a most dreadful fight.
when the ground hog was told about it he said, "what foolishness it is to want to tell the biggest story! my grandfather told us once that a lie was always a lie, and that calling it a joke didn't make it any better. i think he was right."
and the snow buntings and juncos, who are bright and honest, nodded their dainty little heads and said, "nobody in our own dear north country ever spoke a truer word than that." so they became firm friends of the ground hog, even if he were not so large as the rock.
the end.
true stories of wonderful deeds
the royal oak
there is in shropshire a fine oak-tree which the country people there call the "royal oak". they say it is the great-grandson, or perhaps the great-great-grandson of another fine old oak, which more than two hundred years ago stood on the same spot, and served once as a shelter to an english king. this king was charles ii, the son of the unlucky charles i who had his head cut off by his subjects because he was a weak and selfish ruler.
on the very day on which that unhappy king lost his head, the parliament passed a law forbidding anyone to make his son, prince charles of wales, or any other person, king of england. but the scottish people did not obey this law. they persuaded the young prince to sign a paper, solemnly promising to rule the country as they wished; then they crowned him king. as soon as the parliament heard of this they sent cromwell and his ironsides against the newly-crowned king and his followers, and after several battles the scottish army was at last broken up and scattered at worcester.
charles fled and hid in a wood, where some poor wood-cutters took care of him and helped him. he put on some of their clothes, cut his hair short, and stained his face and hands brown so that he might appear to be a sunburnt workman like them. but it was some time before he could escape from the wood, for cromwell's soldiers were searching it in the hope of finding some of the king's men. one day, charles and two of his friends had to climb into the tall oak to avoid being caught. they had with them some food, which proved very useful, for they were obliged to stay in their strange hiding-place for a whole day. the top of the oak-tree had been cut off some few years before this time, and this had made the lower branches grow thick and bushy, so that people walking below could not easily see through them. it was a fortunate thing for charles, for while he was in the tree, he heard the soldiers beating the boughs and bushes in the wood as they searched here and there, and even caught glimpses of them through the leaves as they rode about below.
when they had gone, without even glancing up into the tall oak-tree, he came down, and rode away from the wood on an old mill-horse, with his friends the wood-cutters walking beside him to take care of him as best they could. the saddle was a poor one, and the horse's pace jolted charles so much, that at last he cried out that he had never seen so bad a steed. at this the owner of the horse jestingly told him that he should not find fault with the poor animal, which had never before carried the weight of three kingdoms upon its back. he meant, of course, that charles was king of the three kingdoms of england, and scotland, and ireland.
carried by the old horse, and helped by the poor wood-cutters, charles at last reached the house of a friend. here he hid for a time, and then went on to try and escape from the country. this time, so that he might not be discovered, he was dressed as a servant, and rode on horseback, with a lady sitting on a cushion behind him, as was then the fashion.
after several more dangers he managed to get on board a ship and sailed away to france.
bonnie prince charlie
prince charlie was the grandson of king james ii, who was driven away from the throne of england because he was a selfish man and a bad ruler.
the young prince tried to win the crown back again. he came over to scotland from france, with only seven followers; but soon a great many of the scots joined him, for he was so gay, and handsome, and friendly, that all who saw him loved him. they called him "bonnie prince charlie".
but though the prince and his followers were very brave, they had no chance against the well-trained soldiers of king george of england. they won a few victories; then they were thoroughly beaten in the battle of culloden. thousands of brave scots were slain, and the prince had to fly for his life.
after this, for many weeks, he hid among the moors and mountains from the english soldiers who were trying to find him. he lived in small huts, or in caves, and many times had nothing but the wild berries from the woods to eat. once he stayed for three weeks with a band of robbers, who were very kind to him; and though the king offered a large sum of money to anyone who would give him up, not one of his poor friends was false to him.
at last, a young and beautiful scottish lady, named flora macdonald, helped him to escape. she gave him woman's clothes, and pretended that he was her servant, called betty burke. then she took him with her away from the place where the soldiers were searching, and after a time he reached the sea, and got safely away to france.
nelson and hardy
lord nelson was one of the greatest seamen that ever lived. he commanded the british fleet at the battle of trafalgar, when the navies of france and spain were beaten, and england was saved from a great danger. he did not look like a famous admiral on board his ship, the victory, that day. he was a small man, and his clothes were shabby. he had lost one arm and one eye in battle; but with the eye which remained he could see more than most men with two, and his brain was busy planning the course of the coming fight. just before it began, he went over his ship, giving orders to the crew, and cheering them with kind words, which touched the hearts of the rough men, who loved their leader and were proud of him.
"england expects every man to do his duty" was the last message he sent them. every man did his duty nobly that day, though the battle was fierce and long; but it was the last fight of the brave commander. he was shot in the back as he walked the deck with his friend captain hardy, and was carried below.
he lay dying for several hours, but, in spite of his great pain, his one thought was of the battle. "how goes the day with us?" he asked of hardy; and when told that many of the enemies' ships were taken, he cried eagerly, "i am glad. whip them, hardy, as they have never been whipped before." later, when his friend came to tell him that the victory was won, nelson pressed his hand. "good-bye, hardy!" said he, "i have done my duty, and i thank god for it." these were the last words of one of england's bravest sons.
watt and the kettle
there was once a little scotch boy named james watt. he was not a strong child, and could not always run and play with other boys, but had often to amuse himself at home. one holiday afternoon little james amused himself in this way. he held a saucer over the stream of steam which came from the spout of a boiling kettle, and as he watched he saw little drops of water forming on the saucer. he thought this was very strange, and wondered why it happened, for he did not know that steam is just water changed in form by the heat, and that as soon as it touches something cold it turns again into water. he asked his aunt to explain it, but she only told him not to waste his time. if she could have foreseen the work which her nephew would do when he became a man, she would not have thought he was wasting his time.
when james watt grew up, he was as much interested in steam and its wonderful power, as he had been as a boy. he was sure it could be made of great service to men. it was already used for driving engines, but the engines were not good, and it cost much money to work them. watt thought they could be improved, but it was long before he found out the way to do this. often, he sat by the fire watching the lid of the kettle as it was made to dance by the steam, and thinking of many plans; and at last a happy thought came to him. his plan enabled great improvements to be made in the working of engines, and now steam drives our trains and ships, our mills and factories, and is one of our most useful servants.
queen victoria and her soldiers
queen victoria was always proud of her brave soldiers. in time of war, she gave orders that news of them was to be sent to her every day, and when the generals returned home, they were commanded to visit her, and to tell her of the bravery of the troops.
during the long war with the russians in the crimea, the british soldiers suffered greatly from the freezing winds, and rain, and snow, of that cold land. when queen victoria heard of this, she and her children worked with their own hands to make warm clothing for them. a great many of the wounded and sick men were sent home in ships, to be nursed in the english hospitals, and the queen paid several visits to the poor fellows as they lay there. moving from one bed to another, she cheered them with hopeful words, and listened gladly to their stories of the battles in which they had fought. when she saw that the hospitals were crowded, and not very comfortable, she told parliament that better ones ought to be provided, and after a time this was done, and the fine hospital of netley was built, of which the queen laid the first stone.
once, queen victoria herself gave medals to some wounded and disabled soldiers who had fought very bravely. some of these men could not raise their arms to salute their queen; some could not walk, but had to be wheeled in chairs to her side; but all were proud to receive their medals of honour from her hands.
"noble fellows," she wrote of them afterwards, "i feel as if they were my own children."
the relief of lucknow
during the time of the terrible indian mutiny, when most of the native troops rose against their british rulers, and vowed to kill every white person in the land, many cruel deeds were done. a great number of white people were slain before the british troops could come to their rescue, but in some places they managed to hold out until help reached them.
this was the case in the city of lucknow, where the british governor with a small body of troops, and a great many women and children, took refuge in the government house from a vast host of rebels who came to attack them. many of the brave defenders were killed by the shot and shell of the enemy. many others, and especially the little children, fell sick and died, for the heat was very great, and there was no good water to be had. then, after many days, a small body of white soldiers fought their way into the city, and brought help and hope to the rest of the party. they were only just in time. had they come a few days later they would have found the government house a heap of ruins, and their friends dead, for the rebels were making a mine under the building and meant to blow it up with gunpowder. but alas! the newcomers were not strong enough to fight their way out of lucknow with a crowd of helpless women and children and sick folk, so they, too were now shut in. for two months longer they held out. then at last, when they had almost lost hope, the great sir colin campbell with his brave highlanders and other soldiers defeated the rebels, and brought the band of sick, starving, and weary people safely away.
grace darling
on a small rocky island, off the north coast of england, there is a lighthouse. a man named william darling was once keeper of this lighthouse, and his daughter grace lived with him. every day grace darling helped her father to trim the lamps, so that at night they might shine brightly, and warn sailors to steer their ships away from the dangerous rocks, upon which they would have been dashed to pieces.
one stormy night grace woke with the sound of screams in her ears. the screams came from the sea, so she knew that some ship must be in distress. she roused her father, but they could see nothing in the darkness. when daylight came, they found that a ship had been wrecked upon the rocks some way off, and a few people were clinging to the masts. grace wished to go at once in a boat to save them; but at first her father hung back, for the wind and sea were wild, and he feared that the small boat would be overturned by the great waves. then grace ran to the boat, and seized an oar, for she could not bear to let the poor men die without trying to save them; and the father could not let his brave, daughter go alone, so he followed, and they rowed off.
it was hard work pulling against the strong sea, and several times the small boat was almost sunk. but at last it reached the wreck, and william darling managed to land upon the rock, and with great care and skill helped the half-frozen people into the small boat. then they were taken to the lighthouse, where grace warmed and fed them, until the storm ceased, and they could return to their homes.
david livingstone
at one time many people believed that the middle of africa was a sandy desert, where nothing could live but camels and ostriches. but they were mistaken. the great traveller, david livingstone, journeyed into this unknown country, and he found that it was not a desert but a beautiful land, where many tribes of black people dwelt. he also saw that these people were often seized by strangers, and taken away to be sold as slaves. this sight filled him with sadness, and he made up his mind to put a stop to this cruel traffic. he worked hard, tracing the courses of the rivers, finding the best tracts of land, and teaching the natives.
then he urged his countrymen to send others after him to settle in this fair country, to help the natives to learn useful trades, and to drive away the slave-merchants.
for some years he was quite alone, with his black servants, in the midst of this wild land. his friends grew anxious, and sent mr. stanley, another great traveller, to look for him. stanley marched for nearly a year before he found livingstone. the old explorer was white and worn with sickness and hardship, and he was overjoyed to clasp once more the hand of a white man, and to hear again the english tongue. but he would not return to england. he said his work was not yet done, and he set out once more on his travels. it was his last journey. one morning his servants found him dead upon his bed. since that time much has been done to make central africa a prosperous land. other white men have followed where livingstone led, and wherever they have settled, the wicked slave-trade has been stopped.
the battle of waterloo
fields of waving corn, green woods, fruitful orchards, a pretty farmhouse and a few cottages such was the plain of waterloo. and there, on a summer sunday, nearly a hundred years ago, was fought a famous battle, in which the british troops under the duke of wellington beat the french army, and broke the power of the great napoleon for ever.
"we have them," cried napoleon as he saw the british drawn up before him. he thought it would be easy to destroy this army, so much smaller than his own, before their friends the prussians, who were on the way to help them, came up. but he was mistaken. wellington had placed his foot-soldiers in squares, and though the french horsemen, then the finest soldiers in the world, charged again and again, these little clumps of brave men stood fast. on his favourite horse "copenhagen", wellington rode to and fro cheering his men. "stand firm, my lads,"
cried he. "what will they say to this in england?"
not till evening, when the prussians came, would he allow them to charge the french in their turn. then, waving his cocked hat over his head, he gave the order, "the whole line will advance", and the impatient troops dashed forward. the french bravely tried to stand against this terrific charge, but they were beaten back, and the battle of waterloo was ended.
sixty thousand men lay dead or wounded under the fruit-trees, and among the trampled corn and grass at the end of that terrible day.
the charge of the light brigade
forward the light!
such was the order given during a great battle to the leader of a band of six hundred british soldiers. forward! and there in front was a line of cannon ready to shoot them down as they came, while on the hills on either side of the valley were the guns and riflemen of the russians.
"surely someone has blundered! my men are sent to certain death,"
thought the leader of the light brigade.
"forward! attack!"
the order was repeated, and with the obedience of well-trained soldiers the brigade started.
"theirs not to make reply, theirs not to reason why, theirs but to do and die:
into the valley of death rode the six hundred."
on every side thundered the enemy's guns, and shot and shell fell thick and fast, but on through all rode the brave horsemen, on till they reached the cannon at the end of the valley. the smoke of the enemy's fire closed round and hid them from their watching comrades, but now and again the scarlet lines could be seen cutting down those who tried to stop their charge.
"flashed all their sabres bare, flashed as they turned in air, sabring the gunners there, charging an army, while all the world wonder'd."
and then only, when the strange order had been obeyed, when their duty had been nobly done in the face of death, did the light brigade all that was left of it turn to ride back. alas! there were not then six hundred. barely two hundred brave men, wounded, and blackened by smoke and powder, reached the british camp. the rest of the noble band lay dead or dying in the valley of death.
"when can their glory fade?
o the wild charge they made!
all the world wonder'd.
honour the charge they made!
honour the light brigade, noble six hundred!"
the coronation of king edward vii
never had a country a more popular king than king edward vii, nor a more gracious queen than queen alexandra, and never was a happier day for the english people than that on which king edward was crowned. a few days before the date fixed for the coronation the king suddenly became ill, and a great gloom fell over the country, for it was feared that he might never be crowned. but though his illness was severe he soon began to get better, and when he was out of danger the hearts of his subjects were filled with joy and thankfulness. guns were fired, church-bells pealed, and glad shouts and cheers rang out from the happy crowds which lined the streets of london, through which the king and queen, in the midst of their gay procession, drove to westminster abbey.
inside the gray old abbey was one of the most brilliant gatherings the world has ever seen. princes and princesses from other lands were there, in their robes of state; peers and peeresses, in velvet, and ermine, and glittering diamonds; grave statesmen; and soldiers in their gay uniforms.
it was a grand and solemn scene when, before them all, the aged archbishop of canterbury drew near to the king, and with trembling hands placed the crown upon his head.
"the lord give you a fruitful country, and healthful seasons, victorious fleets and armies, and a quiet empire." these are the words that the old man said when he had crowned the king, and each one of us will pray that all these blessings may indeed rest upon king edward vii, and the great empire over which he rules.
war.
over the broad, fair valley, filling the heart with fear, comes the sound of tramping horses, and the news of danger near.
'tis the enemy approaching, one can hear the muffled drum, and the marching of the soldiers, as on and on they come.
soon the air is rent in sunder, bullets flying sharp and fast, many stout hearts fail and tremble, every moment seems their last.
on the ground lie dead and dying, young and old alike must fall; none to come and aid the sufferer, fight they must for freedom's call.
many are the anxious loved ones praying for the war to cease, waiting for the right to conquer, bringing freedom, rest, and peace.
e.s.
a boy's heroic deeds.
may 31st, 1889, is a day that will long be remembered with horror by the people in the beautiful valley of the conemaugh, in pennsylvania. on that date occurred the terrible disaster which is known to the world and will be named in history as the "johnstown flood."
for many days previous to that date it had been raining hard, and great floods extended over a vast region of country in pennsylvania, new york and the district of columbia. never before had there been such a fall of rain in that region within the memory of the oldest inhabitant. the waters in the river and creeks of that beautiful valley rose rapidly and overflowed their banks, while the people looked on in wonder, but seemingly not in fear. suddenly there appeared to their wondering gaze a great bay horse galloping at break-neck speed and bearing a rider who waved his hands to them and cried: "south fork dam will burst. to the hills for your lives." only a few heeded his words of warning, while many mocked and jeered. on dashed the rider to warn still others of the impending danger, and, alas, to be himself and horse dashed to death by the massive timbers of a falling bridge. south fork dam did break, and the mighty waters of conemaugh lake were hurled with resistless force upon the doomed people of that beautiful valley. the terrible details of the appalling disaster would fill several volumes larger than this. on rushed the mighty waters, sweeping onward in their flood dwellings, churches and buildings of every description, whether of wood, brick or stone, until johnstown was reached and destroyed. the town was literally lifted from its foundations. thousands of men, women and children were caught up and swirled away in the pitiless flood, and their agonizing but vain appeals for help could be heard amidst the mighty roar of the waters. many acts of heroism were performed by brave men and women yes, and boys in rescuing victims of the flood. only one of them concerns us here. charles hepenthal, a schoolboy, seventeen years of age, who was on his way to bellefonte from his home at east liberty, pa., on the evening of the flood, stood quietly among the passengers on the express train, as they crowded to view the terrible havoc done by the flood. as the flood reached the train, at sang hollow, a small frame house came pitching down the mad tide, an eddy floated it in, near to the train, so close that the wailing cries of an infant were heard, piercing their way through the roar. charles hepenthal's heart was touched and his courage was equal to the emergency. he determined to rescue that little wailing waif from a watery grave. strong men urged him to desist, insisting that he would only sacrifice his own life for nothing that it was impossible for any one to survive in the surging waters. but the boy was resolved.
he cut the bell cord from the cars, tied it fast to his body, and out into the whirling gulf he went; he gained the house, secured the infant and returned through the maddened waters with the rescued babe in his arms. a shout went up from the passengers on the train. "wait!" he cried; "there is still another in the house, i must save her!" and, seizing a plank to use as a support, he plunged again into the surging waters. ah! his struggle this time was harder, for his precious load was heavy. in the floating house on his first visit he found a little girl, apparently ten years old, disrobed and kneeling beside her bed, on which lay the screaming infant, praying to her father in heaven to save her and her baby brother from the fury of the flood. "god has heard my prayer," she cried, as charles entered the door. "oh, save the baby, quick," and then fainted away on the floor. when charles had landed the babe in safety and returned again for the girl, he found her still unconscious on the floor, and the water was fast flowing in at the door.
in another minute she would have been drowned. but the brave boy's manly arms were soon around her, and with his precious load the young hero fought his way back to land and was given three times three cheers and a "tiger" by the passengers of the day express.
a cat's extraordinary leap.
in the latter part of 1880, at a time when the washington monument had reached a height of 160 feet, an adventurous and patriotic cat ascended the interior of the shaft by means of the ropes and tubing. when the workmen arrived at the upper landing the next morning, and began to prepare for the day's work, pussy took fright and, springing to the outer edge, took a "header" of 160 feet to the hard earth below. in the descent which was watched closely by two score of men, the cat spread herself out like a flying squirrel and alighted on all fours. after turning over on the ground a few times in a dazed manner, she prepared to leave the grounds and had gotten almost beyond the shadow of the monument, when a dog belonging to one of the workmen pounced upon her and killed her, she, of course, not being in her best running trim, after performing such an extraordinary feat. one of the men procured the body of the dead feline, smoothed out her silky coat, and turned the remains over to a representative of the smithsonian institution, who mounted the skin and placed it under a glass case. the label on the case tells this wonderful story in a few words: "this cat on september 23, 1880, jumped from the top of washington's monument and lived."
a brave queen
long ago, when this country was a wild land, there lived a beautiful and brave queen named boadicea.
her husband, the king, was dead, but she had two daughters whom she loved very much.
boadicea was queen of a part of britain. there were no large towns in her land, but there were forests of fine trees, and fields of corn, and wide stretches of grass-land where many cattle and sheep roamed and fed.
her people were called iceni. they were tall and strong, with blue eyes and yellow hair. the men were brave fighters and good hunters. they hunted the bears and wolves which lived in the forests, and they fought the foes of their beautiful queen.
they made spears to fight with, and strange carts called war-chariots to fight in. these chariots were drawn by swift horses, and, upon the wheels, long sharp knives were fixed. the iceni drove the chariots very fast among their foes, and the knives cut down and killed many of them.
the romans from over the sea were the most dangerous enemies of boadicea and her people.
in those days the romans were the best fighters, and the strongest and wisest people in the world. they came in ships to britain. they had been told that it was a good country, and they hoped to take it for themselves. some of them came to boadicea's land, and took a part of it and of her riches. and when she tried to stop them from doing this, they seized her and the two princesses and beat them cruelly.
this wicked act made the iceni very angry. from all parts of the land, fierce fighting-men came marching in haste to avenge themselves on their enemies, bringing with them their spears and their war-chariots. when all were gathered together, they fell upon the romans.
there were so many of them, and they were so fierce, that the romans could not stand against them. thousands were killed, and the rest ran away to their ships.
but there were many more romans in other parts of britain, and when these heard how their friends had been beaten, they came marching in haste to punish the iceni.
the iceni did their best to get ready to defend themselves, but many of their brave men had been slain and others were wounded and weary, so they could not hope again to win a victory over their strong foes.
before the battle, queen boadicea, with her fair hair waving in the wind, stood before her soldiers and spoke to them. she told them of the wrong which the romans had done, and begged them to fight bravely for their country. then she got into her chariot, and with her daughters lying at her feet, drove to and fro, so that all might see them.
and the soldiers shouted, and promised to fight to the end for their brave queen.
they did fight long and bravely, until most of them were killed, but their foes were too strong for them. when queen boadicea saw that her brave soldiers were beaten, she drank some poison which killed her. she thought it better to die than to be again taken prisoner by the cruel romans.
king alfred and the cakes
once, when good king alfred of england was forced to flee from his strong foes the danes, he hid himself in a wood. in this wood, there was a small cottage, and alfred asked the woman who lived there if he might go in and rest.
now the woman did not know the king, but she saw that he was an english soldier, and that he was very tired, so she let him come in and sit in her kitchen.
upon the hearth before the fire, some cakes were baking, and the woman told the stranger that if he watched them, and took care that they did not burn, she would give him some supper. then she went away to do her work.
at first, king alfred watched the cakes carefully; when they were well cooked on one side he turned the other to the fire. but, after a time, he began to think of his country, and of his poor people, and then he forgot his task.
when the woman came back, the cakes were black and burnt. "you are an idle fellow," cried she angrily. "you would be quite ready to eat the cakes, but you will not take the trouble to watch them."
while she was loudly scolding, her husband came home. he knew king alfred. "hush, wife!" cried he. "it is our noble lord the king!"
when the woman heard this, she was much afraid, and she begged alfred to forgive her.
the king smiled, and said: "i will gladly forgive you for your scolding, good wife, if you will forgive me for spoiling your supper."
not angles, but angels
in old days the people of england were not all free, as they are now.
sometimes young men, and women, and little children were sold as slaves, and had to work hard for their masters.
many of these slaves were sent to rome, for the romans thought the tall, fair angles very beautiful, and liked to have them as their servants.
once, a wise and good preacher, named gregory, was walking through the market-place in rome, when he saw a group of slaves standing there, waiting to be bought. among these slaves were some pretty boys with long yellow hair, and blue eyes, and white skin. this was a strange sight to gregory, for most of the people in his land had dark hair, and brown skin.
"who are these boys?" asked he of a man who was standing by.
"they are angles from over the sea," replied the man.
"surely not angles, but angels," said the preacher, looking kindly into the boys' faces. "do they come from england?"
"from heathen england, where men do not know the true god," said the man.
"some day they shall be taught to know god, and then indeed they shall be angels," said gregory.
now gregory did not go away and forget this. when he became a great man and bishop of rome, he sent a good preacher, named augustine, to england, to preach to the people there, and to teach them to be christians.
hereward the wake
when william of normandy came over the sea, and took the crown of england, many english people would not call him king. the young lord hereward was one of these. he and his men made for themselves a "camp of refuge" among the reeds and rushes on the marshes. all day they lay there, hidden from view by the mists which rose from the watery ground, and at night they came out, and attacked the normans in their tents, and burned their towns.
hereward was called "the wake" because he was so watchful and wide-awake that the normans could not catch him. they were always trying to find him, but they did not know the safe paths over the marshes which he and his men used, and when they tried to cross, they sank with their horses in the soft muddy ground, and had to turn back.
but at last a false friend of the english showed them the way to the "camp of refuge", and then hereward had to flee to save his life. he went with a few friends to the sea-shore, and there he found some fishermen who were going to sell fish to the norman guards in an english town.
the fishermen took hereward and his men into their boats, and covered them with straw; then they set sail. the norman guards bought the fish as usual, and had it served for dinner. while they were eating it, the english soldiers came quietly from the boats, and killed most of them before they could get their swords to defend themselves. when the english people in the place saw this, they gladly joined hereward and made him master of their town.
canute
there was once a king of england, named canute, who was a brave and clever man. but he had many lords in his court who were very foolish.
they feared their master, and wished to please him, and because they knew that he was somewhat vain of his strength and cleverness, they thought he would like to be told that he was great, and wise, and powerful.
so they praised him every day, and told him that all he did and all he said was good. they said he was the greatest king on earth, and there was nothing in the world too hard for him to do if he chose. at last king canute tired of their vain words.
one day, as he walked with his lords on the sea-shore, one of them told him that even the waves would obey him.
"bring a chair," said canute, "and place it close to the water."
the chair was brought, and set upon the sand, and the king sat down and spoke to the waves.
"i command you to come no farther," cried he.
but the waves came on and on, until they wetted canute's feet, and splashed his chair.
then the king rose and went to his lords, who were standing a little way off, staring at their master, and talking in low tones about his strange conduct.
"learn from this to keep your tongues from idle praise," said he sternly. "no king is great and powerful but god. he only can say to the sea: 'thus far shalt thou come, and no farther.'"
the brave men of calais
many years ago, king edward iii of england took the town of calais from the french king. he could not take it by force, for the walls were very strong, but he succeeded by another plan. he placed his soldiers all round the walls, and would let no one go into the town to take food to the people. inside the walls, the people waited bravely, but at last all their food was eaten, and then they knew that if they tried to hold the town any longer they would starve.
so the governor sent word to king edward that he would give up the city, and begged him to have mercy on the people.
but edward was angry. "tell your masters," said he to the messenger, "that i will not spare the people unless six of the chief men come out to me, with their feet bare, and ropes around their necks."
at this sad news, the poor starving people cried aloud. but soon six brave men were found who were ready to die for their countrymen, and, with their feet bare and ropes around their necks, they went out to the place where king edward was waiting, with queen philippa and the english nobles.
"great king!" said the men, "we bring you the keys of our town, and we pray you to have mercy on us."
but the king would not listen. "take them away and cut off their heads,"
he cried angrily. and when his nobles begged him to spare such brave enemies he would not listen to them.
then queen philippa, whose heart was filled with pity for the poor men, fell upon her knees.
"my lord," she cried, "if you love me, give me the lives of these men."
king edward could not bear to see his beautiful queen in tears upon the ground, so he raised her, saying: "lady, i wish you had not been here, for i cannot say you nay. take the men, they are yours."
then queen philippa joyfully led the brave men away, and gave them food and clothes, and sent them back to their friends. so they, and all the people of calais, were saved.
wat tyler
in our days, all people in our land, except prisoners, are free to go where they will, and to do what work they please. in olden times it was not so. then, the poorer people were treated like slaves by the nobles; they had to work hard for their masters, and they were not allowed to move from one place to another without asking leave.
this was hard, and it made the people very angry. in the days of the boy-king richard ii, a great many workmen made up their minds to obey the nobles no longer. they banded themselves together in a large army, chose a man named wat tyler for their leader, and marched to london.
the mayor of london tried to stop them, by pulling up the drawbridge which crossed the river thames, but they forced him by threats to let it down again. then they rushed through the streets of london, frightening all the people they met by their wild looks and cries. they broke open the prisons, and set the prisoners free, and burned the palaces of the nobles, but they killed no man and robbed none.
the nobles were much alarmed. with young king richard at their head, they rode out to meet this army, and to ask the people what they wanted.
"we want to be free, and we want our children to be free after us," said wat tyler.
"i promise you that you shall have your wish, if you will return quietly to your homes," said the king.
at this, the people shouted with joy, and all might have been well; but the mayor, seeing wat tyler raise his hand, and fearing that he was going to strike the king, drew his sword, and killed the leader of the people.
then the joyful shouts changed to cries and growls of anger. arms were raised, and the crowd began to press forward. in a minute the little band of nobles would have been attacked, but the boy-king saw the danger. boldly riding to meet the angry people, he put himself at their head. "what need ye, my masters?" cried he. "i am your captain and your king. follow me."
the crowd stopped, surprised by this bold act; the loud cries ceased, and swords and staves were lowered. these rough men did not wish to harm their young sovereign, but to free him from the nobles who gave him evil counsel. they were greatly pleased to find him upon their side, and, with perfect trust and loyalty, they followed where he led; and so for a time the danger was past.
bruce and the spider
robert bruce, king of scotland, sad and weary, lay upon the floor of a lonely cave among the hills. his mind was full of anxious thoughts, for he was hiding from the english soldiers, who sought to take him alive or dead to their king. the brave scots had lost many battles, and bruce began to fear that he would never make his dear country free.
"i will give up trying," said he.
just then a spider, hanging from the roof of the cave, by a long thread, swung before the king's eyes, and he left his gloomy thoughts to see what the little creature would do.
the spider began to climb its thread slowly, pulling itself up little by little; but it had gone only a short way, when it slipped and fell to the end once more.
again and again it started to climb, and again and again it slipped back, until it had fallen six times.
"surely the silly little creature will now give up trying to climb so fine a thread," thought bruce. but the spider did no such thing. it started on its upward journey yet a seventh time, and this time it did not fall. up it went, inch by inch, higher and higher, until at last it reached the roof, and was safely at home.
"bravo!" cried the king. "the spider has taught me a lesson. i too will try until i win."
bruce kept his word. he led his brave men to battle, again and again, until at last the english were driven back to their own land, and scotland was free.
richard and blondel
in a gloomy prison, in a foreign land, lay richard i, king of england.
he had been with some other kings to a great war in the holy land, where he had won battles, and taken cities, and gained much honour. men called him richard lion-heart, because he was as brave as a lion in fighting, and his soldiers loved him and would follow him into any danger. one strong city, called acre, held out for nearly two years against the armies of the other kings, but when richard arrived it gave way almost at once.
because of his bravery, and his many victories, all men praised king richard, and this made some of the other kings hate him, for they were jealous that he should have more honour than they. when he was on his way back to england, one of these envious men seized him secretly, and threw him into prison.
and now poor richard could fight no more, nor could he see the blue sky, and the green fields which he loved. one day, as he sat sad and lonely in his prison, he heard a voice singing, beneath the window. he started.
"surely," said he, "that is the voice of my old friend blondel, and that is the song we used to sing together." when the song was ended, the king sang it again in a low voice. then there was a joyful cry from the man outside, and richard knew that it was indeed his friend.
blondel had journeyed many days seeking his lost master. now he hastened to england, and told the people where to find their king, and very soon richard was set free, and went back to his own land.
the white ship
the night was dark, and a stormy wind was blowing, when the white ship set sail from the shore of france. prince william of england and his sister and their young friends were going back to their own land, after a visit to the french king.
the english king, henry i, with his courtiers, had sailed earlier, and had now almost reached home. but the prince would not go with them, he wished to make merry before starting.
there had been eating, and drinking, and dancing, and singing on board the white ship, and everyone was merry.
but the sailors had drunk so much wine that they could not see to steer aright. soon there was a crash, and the ship trembled. it had struck a rock, and was sinking.
then the sounds of merriment were changed to cries of fear. "save us!"
shrieked the terrified people. "save the prince," cried the captain, "the rest of us must die!" there was only one small boat on the ship, and prince william was put into this, and rowed away. but he had not gone far, when he heard his sister crying to him to save her.
"go back!" shouted he. the boat was rowed back, but when it came near the ship, so many people jumped into it, that it was overturned and all in it were drowned.
soon the white ship sank also, and of all the gay company upon it only one man was saved.
when king henry heard that his only son was dead, he was very sorrowful, and it is said that no man ever again saw a smile upon his face.
joan of arc
in a village in the green country of france, there once lived a girl named joan. she spent her days in sewing and spinning, and in minding her father's sheep.
at that time there was a sad war in france, and the english had won many battles. joan was grieved to hear of the trouble of her country. she thought of it night and day, and one night she dreamt that an angel came, and told her to go and help the french prince.
when joan told her friends of this dream, they laughed at her.
"how can a poor girl help the prince?" asked they.
"i do not know," replied joan; "but i must go, for god has sent me." so she went to the prince, and said: "sir, my name is joan. god has sent me to help you to win the crown of france."
they gave joan a suit of white armour, and a white horse, and set her at the head of the army. she led the soldiers to fight, and the rough men thought she was an angel, and fought so bravely that they won many battles.
then the prince was crowned king of france.
when this was done, joan felt that her work was over. "i would that i might go and keep sheep once more with my sisters and my brothers; they would be so glad to see me," pleaded she. but the king would not let her go. so joan stayed; but her time of victory was past. soon, she was taken prisoner by the english, and cruelly burned to death. she died as bravely as she had lived, and her name will never be forgotten.
afloat with a tiger.
a traveler in faraway india relates the following thrilling adventure with a tiger: from the heavy rain which falls upon indian mountains the low-lying country is liable to such sudden floods that every year many beasts, and even human beings, are drowned ere they can make their escape to the higher grounds. on one occasion a terrible flood came up so suddenly that i had to spend a day and night in an open canoe in consequence, during which time i had good opportunities of seeing the good and bad effects produced by them. i lived at the time in a mat house, situated upon a hill which i supposed was quite above high-water mark, but an old mahometan gentleman having told me that, when he was a little boy, he recollected the water once rising higher than the hill, i took the precaution of keeping a canoe in a small ditch close at hand.
the rainy season began, and daily the river rose higher. one morning we noticed that the mountain tops were covered with heavy banks of dark clouds, though no rain fell out on the plain where we were; but we noticed many animals, a leopard among others, sneak out of the high grass and make for hilly ground. the most curious thing, however, was the smart manner in which rats and even grasshoppers came scampering away from the threatening danger. these latter came in such crowds toward my bungalow that not only the fowls about the premises had a good feed on them, but kites and crows began to swoop down in such numbers that the air was filled with their cries and the noise of their rushing wings.
while watching the immense destruction of these insects we were startled by the outbreak of the thunderstorm high up on the mountains, but far above the peals of thunder rose the terrible sound of rushing water. animals now came tearing out of the lowlands too terrified to notice whither they went, so that i stood ready, gun in hand, in case any of the dangerous kind should try to seek an asylum on my particular hill; but with the exception of a huge wild boar, who had to be shot as he charged up the slope, all took refuge elsewhere.
soon the water burst through the river bank, spreading over the country, sweeping down the tall grass jungle and surging and roaring round our hill. packing all that was valuable in small parcels, we gathered them in a heap, hoping that the flood would subside ere it reached the building. all round about large trees, uprooted by the terrible force of the deluge, were swept along, several animals vainly trying to keep a footing among their roots and branches. at last the water reached the steps of the house; so, pulling our boat close up, we stepped in with what we could save and hung to the wooden posts of the building, vainly trusting that the worst had come; but it was not so, for we soon had to leave go the post and pass the boat's rope round a tree. the water then rushed in, the house toppled over, and it and its contents were swept away by the flood.
in a short time the tree began to shake and bend, so we knew that it was being uprooted; therefore, letting go the rope, we launched forth upon the seething waste of waters and were whirled away. onward we rushed through masses of logs, branches, the remains of houses, and such like wreck, having to be very careful that our frail vessel did not get upset or crushed. twice we made for the tops of hills that showed themselves above water, but on approaching them we found that they had been taken possession of by wild animals.
here a tiger crouched on a branch of a tree, seemingly too much alarmed at his perilous position to molest the half-dozen deer that crowded timidly together right underneath his perch. up above him the smaller branches were stocked with monkeys, who looked very disconsolate at their enforced imprisonment. as we swept past, the tiger raised his head, gave a deep growl and showed his teeth, then crouched down again as if fully aware of his helplessness, and we had too much to think of ourselves to interfere with him.
gaining the open country, the scene was one of desolation; but the current was not so strong, so we turned round, seeing the flood was going down, and by nightfall we had got back to where the house had stood. every vestige of the once pretty homestead had disappeared, with sheep and cattle, though the fowls had managed to find a roost on the topmost branches of some orange trees, which alone remained to mark the spot.
as the moon rose, the mountaineers came down from the villages, and, embarking on rafts and in canoes, went round the different hills, shooting and spearing the animals that had swum there; and truly the sight of such a hunting scene was an exciting one. here a stout stag, defending himself with his antlers as best he might against the spearsmen, kept up a gallant fight till death.
the tiger we had seen in the morning took to swimming, and on being wounded with a spear turned on the nearest canoe, upsetting the hunters into the water, where a desperate encounter took place; but he was eventually dispatched by a blow from an ax not, however, before he had clawed some of his pursuers most severely.
at daylight the water had entirely gone down, and a thick, muddy deposit covered all the lowland, while an immense number of snakes, scorpions, and other unpleasant creatures lay dead in all directions, upon which and the drowned animals vultures, crows and kites were feeding.
queen margaret and the robbers.
there were once two kings of england at the same time. one was henry vi.
he was the rightful king, but a very weak and feeble man, and quite unfit to rule his kingdom.
the other was young edward, duke of york, called edward iv. he was made king by some of the nobles, who grew weary of henry and his foolish deeds.
a number of the english people were faithful to king henry, but many others went over to king edward's side, and there were quarrels between the two parties, which ended in a war. this war was called the war of the roses, because the followers of henry wore a red rose as their badge, and edward's friends wore a white one.
in one battle, fought at hexham, the white roses beat the red ones, and king henry was taken prisoner and sent to the tower of london. his wife, queen margaret, with her little son, prince edward, escaped after the battle, and hid themselves in a wild forest. as they wandered among the trees, seeking some place where they might be safe from their enemies, they met a band of robbers. these rough men took away the queen's money and her jewels, tearing her necklace from her neck, and her rings from her fingers. then they began to dispute as to who should have most of the stolen goods. and while they quarrelled, queen margaret took her little boy by the hand and ran away to a thick part of the wood. there they stayed until the angry voices of the robbers could no longer be heard, and then, in the growing darkness, they came stealthily from their hiding-place. they wandered on, knowing not where to go, hoping much to meet some of their friends, and fearing still more to be found by their enemies, the soldiers of the white rose. but, alas! they saw no kind face, and night came on. then, as they crept fearfully from tree to tree, they met another robber.
the poor queen was much afraid that this robber, who looked very fierce, would kill her and the prince, because she had no riches left to give him. in despair she threw herself upon her knees before him, and said:
"my friend, this is the son of your king. i give him into your care."
the robber was much surprised to see the queen and the prince alone, with their clothes torn and stained, and their faces white from hunger and fatigue. but he was a kindhearted man, although his looks were rough, and before he became a robber he had been a follower of king henry, so he was quite willing to do his best for the little prince. he took the boy in his arms, and led the way to a cave in the forest, where he lived with his wife. and in this poor shelter, the queen and her son stayed for two days, listening to every sound, and fearing that their enemies would find them. on the third day, however, the friendly robber met some of the lords of the red rose in the forest, and led them to the cave. the queen and prince were overjoyed to see their friends, and soon they escaped with them to a place of safety.
their hiding-place has been called "queen margaret's cave" ever since that time. if you go to hexham forest, you will be able to see it.
william caxton
in old days, books were not printed as they are now; they were written by hand. this took a long time to do, so there were not many books, and they were so dear that only the rich could buy them.
but after a time, some clever men made a machine, called a printing-press, which could print letters.
about that time, an englishman, named william caxton, lived in holland, and copied books for a great lady. he says his hand grew tired with writing, and his eyes became dim with much looking on white paper. so he learned how to print, and had a printing-press made for himself, which he brought to england. he set it up in a little shop in london, and then he began to print books. he printed books of all sorts tales, and poetry, and history, and prayers, and sermons. in the time which it had formerly taken him to write one book, he could now print thousands.
all sorts of people crowded to his shop to see caxton's wonderful press; sometimes the king went with his nobles. many of them took written books with them, which they wished to have put into print. some people asked caxton to use in his books the most curious words he could find; others wished him to print only old and homely words. caxton liked best the common, simple words which men used daily in their speech.
caxton did a very good thing when he brought the printing-press to england, for, after that, books became much cheaper, so that many people could buy them, and learning spread in the land.
sir philip sidney
when elizabeth was queen of england it was a time of great deeds and great men. the queen was brave and clever herself, so she liked to have brave and clever people around her. great soldiers, and writers, and statesmen went to her court; and when brave seamen came back from their voyages to unknown lands far away, they were invited by the queen to visit her, and tell her of all the strange places and people they had seen. in this elizabeth was wise, for men did their best to show themselves worthy of her favours.
among all the great men at court, none was more beloved than sir philip sidney. he was called "the darling of the court".
at that time, there was much trouble and many wars in some other countries, where people were fighting for the right to worship god in their own way. philip sidney heard of these things when he was a boy in his father's house, and his heart was stirred with pity. later, when he was in france, a great number of people were cruelly killed because they would not pray in the way which the king ordered. sidney never forgot the dreadful sights and sounds of that sad time, and when queen elizabeth sent an army to help the people of holland, who were fighting for their freedom, he asked for leave to go with it. this was granted to him, and he was made one of the leaders.
but alas! he went out to die. in one battle, a small band of the english bravely attacked a large army of their enemies. the horse which sidney was riding was killed under him, and as he mounted another, he was shot in the leg, and his thigh-bone was broken. the horse took fright and galloped away from the fight, but its wounded and bleeding rider held to his seat, and when he reached a place of safety was lifted from his horse, and gently laid upon the ground. he was faint from loss of blood, and in great pain, and his throat was parched with thirst.
"bring me water," said he to a friend.
this was not easy to do, for there was not a stream near at hand, and in order to get to one it would be necessary to pass where the shot from the enemy's cannons was falling fast. but his friend was brave and went through the danger. then he found some water, and brought it to him.
sidney eagerly held out his hand for the cup, and as he was preparing to drink, another poor wounded soldier was carried past. this man was dying; he could not speak, but he looked with longing eyes at the water.
sir philip saw the look, and taking the cup from his own lips, passed it to the soldier, saying: "thy need is greater than mine." the poor man quenched his thirst, and blessed him as he died.
sir philip lived on for a few weeks, growing weaker every day, but he never came back to his own land, and the many friends who loved him.
sidney was great in many ways; very fair to see, very wise and good, and very clever and witty. he was one of the bravest fighters, one of the finest poets, and one of the best gentlemen who ever lived. he will always be remembered for his brave deeds, and his wise sayings, but most of all do men bless his name for this act of kindness to his poor dying comrade.
the "revenge"
in the days of queen elizabeth, english sailors first began to find their way across the seas to new lands, from which they brought home many strange, and rich, and beautiful things. the spaniards sailed across the seas too, to fetch gold and silver from the mines in mexico, which belonged to the king of spain. sometimes the english ships met the spanish ones, and robbed them of their gold, for it was thought quite right and fair in those days to take every chance of doing harm to the enemies of england. of course the spaniards hated the english for this, and whenever they met english ships which were weaker than theirs they attacked them, and robbed them, killing the sailors, or taking them prisoners.
once, a small ship, called the revenge, was sailing home to england, when it met with fifty great spanish vessels. the captain of the revenge was sir richard grenville, and he had a great many sick men on board. there was no time to escape from the spanish ships, which soon surrounded the little revenge. so there were only two courses which sir richard could take. one was to give up his ship to the spaniards; the other was to fight with them till his men were all killed, or his ship sank.
some of the sailors wished him to take the first course, but the others, and all the sick men, said: "nay, let us fall into the hands of god, and not into the hands of spain." this they said because they thought it better to die, than to be made prisoners by the cruel spaniards.
sir richard made up his mind to fight. it was after noon when the firing began, and all night long, until daylight came, the little english ship kept the fifty spanish vessels at bay. then it was found that all the powder was gone, and all the english were dead or dying.
and then only was the flag of the revenge pulled down, to show that she surrendered to her enemies.
the brave sir richard was taken on board a spanish ship, where he soon died of his wounds.
these were his last words: "here die i, richard grenville, with a joyful and quiet mind, for i have ended my life as a good soldier ought. i have fought for my country and my queen, for honour, and for god."
the pilgrim fathers
there was a time when the people of england were not allowed to pray to god in the way they thought right, but were punished if they did not worship as the king ordered. this was very hard, and when james i was king, a little band of brave people, who found that they could not obey the king, left their country to make a new home across the sea, where they could be free. they are called the "pilgrim fathers".
a hundred people men, women, and children set sail in a little ship called the mayflower for the new world which a great explorer called columbus had discovered away in the west, and which we now call america.
they had a long and stormy voyage, but at last, in mid-winter, they landed on the shores of north america, and set up their huts.
at first they had much trouble, for the ground was frozen and barren.
they suffered from hunger and sickness, and the wild indians who lived in that land came down upon them and tried to drive them away. but the pilgrim fathers did not lose courage. they were free, and they worked hard, and waited in patience for brighter days. by and by other ships from england brought food to keep them alive, and more people to help them. then they made friends with the indians, and when spring came they planted seeds and grew crops for themselves.
after a time many other englishmen, who wished to be free, followed the pilgrim fathers, and settled in america. they founded the colonies of new england, which are now a part of the united states.
guy fawkes
in the time of james i, many of the english people were very hardly treated because of their religion. at last they could bear the ill-usage no longer, and they thought of a plan to get rid of the king and queen and their eldest son.
many barrels of gunpowder were secretly put into a cellar under the parliament house, where james was to meet his lords and commons on november 5; and a man named guy fawkes was hired to set fire to it at the right time, and so to blow up the hall above, and all in it.
all was ready, when one of the plotters remembered that a friend of his would be at the meeting next day. as he did not wish him to be killed, he sent him a letter, without signing his name, saying: "do not go to the house, for there shall be a sudden blow to many, and they shall not see who hurts them".
the lord who received this letter took it to the king's council, and when king james saw it, he guessed what the "sudden blow" would be. men were sent to search the cellars, and there, on the very night before the deed was to be done, guy fawkes was found waiting till the time should come to set fire to the powder. he was cruelly tortured to make him tell all he knew, but he was a brave man, and he died without betraying his friends.
since that time, every year, on the 5th of november, bonfires have been lighted in many places in england, and "guys" burned, to remind people how an english king was once saved from a great danger.
cromwell and his ironsides
when charles i came to the throne of england, it was soon seen that he was as bad a king as his father james i had been.
he did not care at all for the good of his country and his people, but thought only of his own pleasure. he took away men's money and lands, and if they offended him he took their lives too.
englishmen would not bear this unjust treatment for long, and soon a war began between the king and the people, who were determined to be free.
at first the king and his men were victorious everywhere, for they were all used to horses and arms, and fought so well and so bravely that the people could not stand against them. but at last a great leader arose among the people. this leader, who was called oliver cromwell, was a rough man, but he was just, good, and honest.
he saw at once that the people would never gain the victory over the brave gentlemen-soldiers of king charles, unless they had obedient and well-trained men to fight for them. so he chose a band of plain, hard-working men who feared god, and loved duty and right, and he spent all his money in fitting them with arms and horses, and in training them sternly, until they became the finest soldiers the world has ever known.
cromwell called his men his "lovely company", and others called them "ironsides", for they were strong and firm as iron, and were never beaten. it was these brave, sober, obedient soldiers who at last defeated the king's army, and won freedom for the people of england.
the spanish armada
the armada was a great fleet which the king of spain sent to attack england, in the days of queen elizabeth. there were more than a hundred ships, so large and high that they looked like towers on the sea; and they came sailing along arranged in the shape of a big half-moon.
the great english admiral, sir francis drake, was playing at bowls when messengers came hurrying to tell him that the armada was approaching. he quietly finished his game, and then set sail to fight the spaniards. his fleet was not so large as the armada, and the ships were small, but they were light and fast. they met the armada in the english channel, and sailed round it, attacking any ship that dropped out of line, and speeding away before the clumsy spanish vessels could seize them. in this way they did much harm to the enemy. then, one night, when it was dark, and the spanish vessels were lying quietly at anchor, admiral drake sent eight blazing fire-ships into their midst. in great fear, the spaniards cut their anchor-ropes, and sailed out to the open sea, and the english ships followed, firing upon them as they fled. for two days the english chased the flying spaniards. then their powder and shot failed, and a storm arose; so they had to go back. the armada sailed on, hoping to escape, but the wild tempest tossed many of the great vessels on the rocks and cliffs of the coast, and dashed them to pieces. only a few, broken and battered, with starving and weary men on board, ever reached spain again. and so england was saved.
the defence of lathom house
lathom house is an old english castle. when the war broke out between king charles i and his people, the earl of derby, who was the master of this castle, went away to fight for the king. he left the countess at home with her children, with a small band of armed men to guard her and the castle. one day an army of the people's soldiers came to the castle, and the leader of the army sent word to the countess that she must give up the castle at once.
